Diagnosis
Table 1.

Features Indicating a Poor Prognosis in Severe Malaria.
Patients with malaria usually present with nonspecific and irregular fever, chills, headache, and malaise. Vomiting occurs in approximately 20 percent of patients, and mild diarrhea in less than 5 percent. As the disease progresses, the spleen enlarges and the patient becomes anemic. Malaria is so common that any patient who has been in a malarious area in the previous two months (usual incubation period, two weeks) should be considered to have malaria until it has been proved otherwise. The blood tests show a normal white-cell count and mild thrombocytopenia. The diagnosis is confirmed by microscopy of stained thin and thick blood films, at a magnification of 1000. The intraerythrocytic parasites should be identified (if the species is uncertain, it should be considered to be P. falciparum) and counted.1 In severe malaria, the developmental stage of the parasites and the percentage of neutrophils containing malarial pigment should also be noted. The prognosis worsens with increasing parasite counts, more mature parasites, and more neutrophils containing pigment (Table 1).2 A negative blood smear makes the diagnosis very unlikely, but if there is still uncertainty the test should be repeated every 12 hours for 48 hours. A simple test strip for finger-prick blood samples, which uses a monoclonal antibody to the P. falciparum histidine-rich protein 2, has a diagnostic sensitivity similar to that of microscopy.3

Uncomplicated Malaria
The treatment of malaria depends on the severity of the infection, the patient's age, the degree of background immunity (if any), the likely pattern of susceptibility to antimalarial drugs, and the cost and availability of such drugs. For this reason, recommendations vary according to geographic region and should be under constant review.4

Table 2.

Recommended Doses of Antimalarial Drugs for the Treatment of Malaria in Adults and Children.
The three so-called benign malarias, P. vivax, P. malariae, and P. ovale, should all be treated with chloroquine. High-grade resistance to chloroquine in P. vivax has been reported from Oceania,5,6 but elsewhere the parasite remains generally sensitive and responds rapidly. Chloroquine is usually well tolerated, although it commonly produces pruritus in dark-skinned patients, and in the treatment of acute malaria it may cause nausea, dysphoria, and very rarely, a transient neuropsychiatric syndrome or cerebellar dysfunction. Recent studies have shown that the traditional 3-day course of treatment of 25 mg (base) per kilogram of body weight (10 mg per kilogram initially, 10 mg per kilogram at 24 hours, and 5 mg per kilogram at 48 hours) can be compressed into 36 hours for convenience (Table 2).8 A two-week course of primaquine is also required to treat infections with P. vivax and P. ovale in order to eradicate forms of the parasite (hypnozoites) that survive in the liver (radical cure). This prevents relapse in the majority of cases. Primaquine may cause nausea and abdominal pain, particularly if taken on an empty stomach, and more important, oxidant hemolysis with methemoglobinemia, anemia, and sometimes hemoglobinuria. Patients with a deficiency of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase are particularly vulnerable to oxidant hemolysis, and primaquine is contraindicated in patients with severe variants of the deficiency. In places where mild variants of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency are common, primaquine (0.8 mg of base per kilogram; adult dose, 45 mg) should be given once a week for six weeks for a radical cure.4 In areas where malaria is endemic and reinfection is common, a radical cure with primaquine is not indicated.

The choice of treatment for P. falciparum depends on the parasite's sensitivity to antimalarial drugs in the area where the infection was acquired. Known sensitive infections (e.g., those from North Africa, Central America north of the Panama Canal, Haiti, or the Middle East) should be treated with chloroquine. Where there is low-grade resistance to chloroquine, amodiaquine (35 mg of base per kilogram over a period of three days) is a more effective alternative.9 Chloroquine-resistant infections in most of Africa and some parts of Asia and South America usually respond to a single-dose combination of a long-acting sulfonamide (usually sulfadoxine) and pyrimethamine. Although both amodiaquine and sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine are well tolerated in treatment, neither should be used as a prophylactic drug, because of potential toxicity (amodiaquine can be associated with agranulocytosis and hepatitis, and sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine can be associated with exfoliative dermatitis, hepatitis, and blood dyscrasias). Unfortunately, resistance to sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine has developed rapidly in many areas (particularly in South America and Southeast Asia). For multidrug-resistant P. falciparum, the choice for treatment is mefloquine, halofantrine, or quinine with tetracycline. Clindamycin is used with quinine in some countries; three-day combination regimens have proved effective in areas of endemic disease,10 but there is insufficient evidence of their effectiveness in nonimmune patients.

Mefloquine is cleared slowly (elimination half-life, two to three weeks),11 and a course of treatment comprises one or two doses (Table 2). Mefloquine is relatively well tolerated, although nausea, vomiting, giddiness, weakness, dysphoria, feelings of dissociation, clouding of consciousness, and nightmares are all common. More serious self-limiting neuropsychiatric reactions have been reported in 0.5 to 1 percent of Europeans and Africans, but in approximately 0.1 percent of Southeast Asian patients.12,13 Although vomiting in the first hour after administration is more common in children, the other adverse effects of mefloquine are more common in adults.14

Halofantrine is more active and better tolerated than mefloquine,15 but its oral bioavailability is poor and variable (although it is increased by the consumption of fat). Halofantrine induces a concentration-dependent delay in atrioventricular conduction and ventricular repolarization16 that has cast a shadow over its future role. Halofantrine should not be given to patients with an abnormally long corrected QT interval or those taking drugs likely to prolong it (Table 2).16 Neither halofantrine nor mefloquine should be used to treat early recrudescences (within 28 days of treatment) of malaria after primary mefloquine treatment, because their respective cardiac and central nervous system effects are increased.

Treatment with oral quinine or quinidine is not well tolerated. These venerable compounds are extremely bitter and often induce the complex of cinchonism (nausea, dysphoria, tinnitus, and high-tone deafness). Fortunately, more serious toxic reactions are rare. Although the combination of quinine with tetracycline or doxycycline remains more than 85 percent effective nearly everywhere,17 compliance with the seven-day courses of treatment required for resistant P. falciparum infections is poor.

The derivatives of artemisinin (qinghaosu) obtained from qinghao, or sweet wormwood (Artemesia annua), and developed as pharmaceutical agents in China, are the most rapidly acting of all antimalarial drugs. These drugs are not registered and therefore not generally available in many countries, but they have been used extensively for the treatment of drug-resistant falciparum malaria in China and Southeast Asia. In both severe and uncomplicated malaria they have given faster relief of fever and considerably faster clearance of parasites than other antimalarial agents, without evident toxicity.18,19 Three compounds have been used: the parent, artemisinin, and two more active derivatives (a water-soluble hemisuccinate, artesunate, and an oil-soluble ether, artemether), both of which are metabolized to a biologically active metabolite, dihydroartemisinin.18 Indeed, artesunate can be considered a prodrug for dihydroartemisinin. In some parts of Southeast Asia (particularly the eastern and western borders of Thailand) where the failure rates of treatment with high-dose mefloquine alone in falciparum malaria now exceed 40 percent, oral artesunate given for three to five days in combination with mefloquine still remains highly effective.20,21 When used alone (for example, for the treatment of recrudescence after treatment with mefloquine), the artemisinin derivatives should be given for seven days.

CHILDREN AND PREGNANT WOMEN
Children tolerate antimalarial drugs relatively well. Mefloquine is not recommended for children who weigh less than 15 kg, but this is a policy of caution based on limited published data. Experience suggests that children are at no additional risk, although infants are more likely to vomit the drug.13,14 Primaquine should not be given to pregnant women or newborn babies because of the risk of hemolysis. Chloroquine, sulfadoxine–pyrimethamine, quinine, and quinidine are considered safe in therapeutic doses in all trimesters of pregnancy, although there is a theoretical risk of kernicterus if sulfadoxine is given in the third trimester. There is also evidence that mefloquine is safe in the second and third trimesters. Although there is little information on the use of the artemisinin derivatives in pregnancy, the general consensus is that they too should be used if they are indicated (i.e., for mefloquine-resistant falciparum malaria), except in early pregnancy, when alternative treatment (quinine) is still preferred.22 Apart from primaquine and halofantrine (for which there are no data), the other antimalarial agents can all be used in women who are breast-feeding.

There are no pediatric formulations of mefloquine, the artemisinin derivatives, primaquine, or in many countries, quinine or chloroquine. Quinine, and particularly chloroquine, are dangerous in overdoses, and should be stored in childproof containers. When treating children, particular care should be taken to ensure that the correct doses are given and retained. Early vomiting is common, particularly after the administration of mefloquine or quinine to infants, and is more likely in children with high fever. Patients should be cooled with acetaminophen, fanning, and sponging with tepid water before they receive oral antimalarial treatment, and they should then be observed for one hour. If vomiting occurs within 1 hour, the full dose should be repeated (with mefloquine, we repeat half the initial dose if the child vomits between 30 and 60 minutes after administration). If vomiting occurs after one hour, it is not necessary to readminister the drugs.

Postural hypotension is common in uncomplicated malaria and is exacerbated by the quinoline antimalarial agents. Febrile patients, both adults and children, should be kept in a horizontal position, and great care should be taken if they get up rapidly from their beds. Mothers should be discouraged from carrying febrile babies vertically immediately after parenteral quinine or chloroquine has been given.

Severe P. falciparum Malaria
MANAGEMENT
Although infections with P. vivax, P. ovale, or P. malariae are very rarely fatal, an infection with P. falciparum may progress rapidly to a lethal multisystem disease. The clinical manifestations of severe malaria depend on age.23 Hypoglycemia, convulsions, and severe anemia are relatively more common in children24,25; acute renal failure, jaundice, and pulmonary edema are more common in adults. Cerebral malaria (with coma), shock, and acidosis, which often terminate in respiratory arrest, may occur at any age. The state of hydration of patients on admission is quite variable; the dividing line between overhydration and underhydration is thin. Adults in particular may have noncardiogenic pulmonary edema and are vulnerable to fluid overload, yet dehydration and hypovolemia contribute to hypotension and shock (particularly in children) and may hasten acute renal failure arising from acute tubular necrosis (particularly in adults).26 After rehydration, the central venous pressure should be maintained at approximately 5 cm of water (pulmonary-artery occlusion pressure, less than 15 mm Hg). When hypercatabolic acute renal failure develops with other evidence of vital-organ dysfunction, dialysis or hemofiltration should be started quickly. Renal function (restoration of urine flow to more than 20 ml per kilogram per day) returns after a median of four days, although some patients will require dialysis for more than a week.

Hypoglycemia occurs in approximately 8 percent of adults27 and 25 percent of children.24,28 After rehydration, a maintenance infusion of 5 to 10 percent glucose should be given to all patients, but the blood glucose level should still be checked frequently. Unconscious patients with cerebral malaria should be kept on their sides, and a lumbar puncture should be performed to rule out bacterial meningitis. The incidence of seizure ranges from more than 80 percent in infants to less than 20 percent in adults. Many of these seizures are focal, and the signs may be subtle in an unconscious patient. Seizures should be treated promptly with intravenous benzodiazepines. Use of prophylactic intramuscular phenobarbital reduces the incidence of seizure, but the optimal dose remains to be determined. Hemolysis is extensive, and anemia develops rapidly. Blood should be transfused if the hematocrit falls below 20 percent. In Africa, where blood free of viral pathogens is in short supply, it has been recommended that the threshold for transfusion be a hemoglobin level of less than 5 g per deciliter if there is respiratory distress, and less than 3 g per deciliter if there is not.29 A transfusion of fresh blood is preferable, particularly if there is marked bleeding due to disseminated intravascular coagulation (found in approximately 5 percent of adults with severe malaria) or to stress ulceration.

Bacterial infections are common. Pneumonia is likely if the duration of coma exceeds three days; urinary tract infections may complicate the drainage of indwelling catheters; and spontaneous (usually gram-negative) septicemia may occur occasionally. Systemic salmonella infections may develop in patients with otherwise uncomplicated malaria.30 If the condition of a patient with severe malaria deteriorates suddenly without an evident cause, hypoglycemia should be ruled out; blood cultures should be performed, and empirical treatment with broad-spectrum antimicrobial agents started. Vital signs, including a patient's coma score, urine output, blood glucose level, and if possible, lactate level, arterial pH, and blood gas levels, should be monitored as frequently as possible. The parasite count should be measured at least twice a day in all patients. If the parasite count has not fallen by at least 75 percent 48 hours after the start of treatment, it should be rechecked, and if confirmed, a different antimalarial agent should be used.

TREATMENT
Chloroquine
In the few remaining places where there is not widespread resistance to the drug, parenteral chloroquine should be given,31 but if there is any uncertainty about resistance, then quinine or quinidine should be used. Chloroquine should be given by controlled-rate intravenous infusion and never by intravenous injection. Intramuscular or subcutaneous administration is a satisfactory alternative: absorption is rapid; bioavailability exceeds 80 percent, even in severe malaria; and the injections are not painful.32 Provided it does not enter the circulation too rapidly, either because the intravenous infusion is too fast or because the dose given in an intramuscular or subcutaneous injection is too large (more than 3.5 mg of base per kilogram), hypotension will not occur and parenteral chloroquine is very well tolerated.

Quinine and Quinidine
The alkaloids from the bark of the cinchona tree still constitute the mainstay of the antimalarial pharmacopeia, as they have for over three centuries. Quinidine, the dextrorotatory diastereoisomer, is more active than quinine, but it is also more cardiotoxic and more expensive. In the United States parenteral quinidine is recommended for severe malaria, because of its wide availability as an antiarrhythmic agent.33 Elsewhere, quinine is used. The cinchona alkaloids are effective against all species of malaria including chloroquine-resistant strains of P. falciparum. 23 Both quinine and quinidine have narrow therapeutic ratios, although serious cardiovascular or nervous system toxic effects during antimalarial treatment are most unusual. Quinine and quinidine should be given by intravenous infusion — never by bolus injection, which can lead to fatal hypotension. The principal adverse effect of these drugs in severe malaria is hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia.27,34 Iatrogenic hypoglycemia usually develops after at least 24 hours of treatment and is a particular problem in pregnant women.35 Quinidine has effects similar to quinine's on insulin secretion but a fourfold greater effect on the heart.36 Electrocardiographic monitoring is required so that infusion rates can be reduced if the corrected QT interval is prolonged by more than 25 percent of the base-line value. Routine electrocardiographic monitoring is unnecessary when quinine is used in patients with previously normal hearts.

The pharmacokinetic properties of the cinchona alkaloids are altered considerably in malaria, with a contraction in the volume of distribution and a reduction in clearance that is proportional to the severity of disease.37 Consequently, doses should be reduced by 30 to 50 percent after the third day of treatment to avoid accumulation of the drugs in patients who remain seriously ill. Binding to plasma proteins, principally to α1-acid glycoprotein, is increased in malaria (from approximately 80 percent to 90 percent for quinine).38,39 This explains why plasma quinine levels that have been associated with blindness and deafness after self-poisoning (more than 10 mg per liter), although common during the treatment of severe malaria, do not cause such adverse effects. The therapeutic range for the unbound drug, which depends on the sensitivity of the infecting malaria parasites to the drug, has not been defined precisely but probably lies between 0.8 and 2 mg per liter, corresponding to total plasma concentrations of approximately 4 to 8 mg per liter for quinidine and 8 to 20 mg per liter for quinine.

When intravenous infusions cannot be given, quinine dihydrochloride, diluted to between 60 and 100 mg per milliliter, should be administered by deep intramuscular injection to the anterior thigh; the initial loading dose should be divided, with half injected in each leg. The intramuscular bioavailability of quinine is good (approximately 90 percent) even in severe malaria.40,41 Injections of undiluted quinine (300 mg per milliliter) are painful and occasionally produce sterile abscesses.

Artemisinin
Artesunate is unstable in solution and is therefore dispensed as a dry powder of artesunic acid, together with an ampule of 5 percent sodium bicarbonate solution. The powder and liquid are mixed, and the sodium artesunate solution is given by intravenous or intramuscular injection. Artemether is more stable than artesunate. It is formulated in peanut oil and given by intramuscular injection. In recent studies42 rectal suppositories of artemisinin have proved as effective as the parenteral drugs. Thus, effective drug treatment for severe malaria can be given in rural settings even if injections cannot. Artemisinin and its derivatives have a broader “window period” of effectiveness than other antimalarial agents during the 48-hour asexual life cycle of the parasite.43 Antiparasitic effects on the younger ring-form parasites lead to their clearance and prevent development to the more mature pathogenic forms that induce the parasitized erythrocytes to adhere to uninfected cells (rosetting) or to vascular endothelium (cytoadherence).44 Artesunate is the most rapidly acting of the available compounds, possibly because it is immediately bioavailable (as dihydroartemisinin) after intravenous injection, and it is absorbed rapidly after oral or intramuscular administration. In two recent, large comparative studies of patients with severe falciparum malaria (which together enrolled over 1000 patients), treatment with intramuscular artemether accelerated parasite clearance but slightly prolonged recovery from coma, and it did not reduce mortality significantly in comparison with quinine.45,46 The results of these trials confirm that artemether is an acceptable and well-tolerated alternative to quinine in severe malaria, but a final assessment with respect to mortality should await a systematic overview of these and other recently completed studies. Over a million patients have been treated with the artemisinin derivatives. No serious toxicity has been reported.18,22 However, in experiments with animals, artemether, the closely related compound arteether, and the metabolite dihydroartemisinin have induced a consistent, but unusual, selective pattern of damage to some of the brain-stem nuclei.47 The relevance of these findings to their use in humans is unresolved but remains a cause of concern.

Ancillary Treatment
Many ancillary treatments have been suggested and tried in severe malaria, but none have been shown unequivocably to affect outcome. Only antipyretics (acetaminophen), anticonvulsants (prophylactic phenobarbital), and exchange transfusion have been supported by sufficient evidence to warrant their use.23,48,49 Exchange transfusion should be performed if there are adequate facilities, the patient is seriously ill, and the parasitemia exceeds 15 percent. Exchange should still be considered with parasitemia in the range of 5 to 15 percent if there are other signs of poor prognosis (Table 1). The roles of antibody against tumor necrosis factor, deferoxamine, mannitol, prostacyclin, dextran, pentoxifylline, and acetylcysteine in the treatment of malaria are unclear; aspirin and hyperimmune serum have been shown to confer no benefit, and heparin, cyclosporine, and high-dose corticosteroids are probably harmful.

The Future
Mother Nature gave us the cinchona alkaloids and qinghaosu. World War II led to the introduction of chloroquine, chloroguanide (proguanil), and eventually, amodiaquine and pyrimethamine. The war in Vietnam brought mefloquine and halofantrine. These drugs are all we have available now to treat malaria. It is difficult to see where the next generation of antimalarial drugs will come from. Even though malaria now affects about 250 million people and kills between 1 million and 2 million children each year, there is little pharmaceutical-industry interest in developing new antimalarial drugs; the risks are great, but the returns on investment are low. Much of the world's malaria occurs in countries with an annual per capita expenditure on health of less than $10. If drug resistance in P. falciparum continues to increase at the current rate, malaria may become untreatable in parts of Southeast Asia by the beginning of the next millennium.