Abstract
This paper presents a prototype for information visualization
in an Augmented Reality environment. The prototype allows
users to perform common tasks in desktop information
visualization tools, such as data dynamic filters, attribute
selection, semantic zoom and details on demand. Such tasks
are seldom available in AR environments. We used a
customized version of ARToolKit, a software tool that allows
the insertion of virtual objects in real environments through
cards with marks. The interactive controls as well as the data
visualization are projected to the user and manipulated
through these cards.
Keywords: augmented reality, information visualization,
interaction techniques
1 Introduction
The ability to evaluate a decision-making process and perform
rapid and accurate strategic changes is each day more
important, specially on the fields of industry, economics and
finances. In order to support theses processes, Data Mining,
Information Visualization and Intelligent Systems projects are
getting more and more attention from the research community.

1
email:bianchi.serique@terra.com.br
2
email:aruanda@redeinformatica.com.br
3email:marcelo@redeinformatica.com.br
4
email:rcasseb@ufpa.br
5
email:serclay@gmail.com
6
email:leofozzy@hotmail.com
7
email:piagodinho@gmail.com
Specifically in the area of Information Visualization, new
tools and techniques are constantly being developed to cope
with the growing demand.
An Information Visualization tool has the purpose of creating
an interactive visual representation that transforms abstract
data in a way that may be promptly understood by the user and
may be used for tasks such as identification, multivariate
correlation, search, exploration and communication.
Many current computational systems have tried to get more
adaptable to human perceptions through more interactive user
interfaces. This is also an important issue when it comes to
Information Visualization tools. In this context, Augmented
Reality (AR) studies new interaction and visualization
mechanisms and allows a more natural user-to-system and
user-to-user communication.
AR creates enriched real environments by merging to this
predominantly real world objects as geometric models,
images, sounds and text and improving user perception. AR is
a multidisciplinary field and may be adopted by Information
Visualization tools.
The goal of this paper is to present a Visualization
Information in Augmented Reality prototype where the user
may visualize and manipulate information in a real time threedimension environment without the use of devices such as a
keyboard or mouse and interact simultaneously with other
users in order to make a decision related to the analyzed data.
The contribution of this prototype are the new interaction
mechanisms, the use of interactive menus and the
implementation of filter techniques that modify the
environment in real time without modifying all virtual
objects. This allows the prototype to be more efficient for the
support of a decision-making process. The prototype uses of
ARToolKit, a free open-source library for the development of
augmented reality applications, with the addition of new

391
functionalities. OpenGL was used for the creation of virtual
three-dimensional objects.
2 Information Visualization
In the different areas of human activities, the arduous task of
extracting knowledge from data sources is primordial to
improve the decision-making process. Professionals who are
responsible for making decisions need efficient tools to help
them perform their tasks in a very fast, simple and precise way.
The Information Visualization area fulfills these requirements,
since Information Visualization is, by definition, the process
of turning abstract data into a visual shape easily understood
by the user, making it possible for him/her to generate new
knowledge about the relations between the data [Spence
2001].
According to Carr [Carr 1999], an information visualization
tool should allow users to perform the following tasks:
∞ General View: the user needs an overall view of all
analyzed data, based on the selected parameters for
the visualization
∞ Zoom: the zoom technique is important because it
allows focusing on the analyzed data. Semantic zoom
also allows the user to visualize more details to the
visualization.
∞ Filter: users frequently need to reduce the size of
data sets by reducing the number of attributes. One
of the most efficient ways is the use of Dynamic
Queries, which is basically a technique that allows
the user to select data without the use of any kind of
command lines.
∞ Details on demmand: when users are exploring a data
set, they’ll need to see details about one item in
particular.
∞ Relationship: If the user discovers an item of interest,
he/she might need to know about other itens with
similar attributes, so the tool could point out these
similar itens.
∞ Historic: the user needs support to undo an action,
show the steps until that point, etc.
3 Augmented Reality and ARToolKit
Augmented Reality’s main characteristic is the creation of
enriched real environments, adding to this predominantly real
environment items such as geometric models, images, sound
and texts and potentializing the utilization of the user’s
senses for a better perception of the environment. This way,
Systems in AR generate to the user a combined vision of
virtual objects generated by computer with real objects
visualized by the user, enlarging the scene with additional
information [Vallino 1998].
Augmented Reality is a particularization a broader area known
as Mixed Reality, which incorporates “virtual elements to the
real environment (Augmented Reality) or takes real elements
to the virtual environment (Augmented Virtuality),
completing the environments” [Milgram et al. 1994]. One of the
great advantages of using AR is the possibility for users to
interact with the virtual and real worlds integrated.
Developed by HIT Lab and distributed as an open code written
in C/C++ Language, the ARToolKit is a tool that allows that
programmers develop applications in AR [Kato et al. 2003].
This library uses computational vision techniques to
precisely calculate the position and orientation of a camera
related to a marker in real time. The programmer can use this
information to draw 3D objects exactly lined with the real
ones.
The construction of objects to be combined to real world can
be done through applications in OpenGL and VRML. There is
also a version of ARToolKit written in Java (JARToolKit)
[Geiger 2005] where JAVA3D can be used [Walsh et al. 2005].
4 The Prototype
In this section, the prototype that uses augmented reality to
implement information visualization techniques is presented.
Figure 1 presents a general view of the changes or new
implementations that were made in ARToolKit to develop the
prototype presented in this paper. Some modules stand out:
Interaction detection module, where the prototype identifies
the action the user wants to perform; 3D objects settings
module, which receives information about an action of the
user and modifies the 3D objects that will be presented to the
user; and the database reader module, which is responsible for
loading the data to the memory so that the prototype can
manipulate the data.
Figure 1: Prototype Modules Overview
4.1 Dataset
An important pre-requisite in the implementation of the
visualization technique is the initial treatment applied to the
database. During this phase, the use of attribute selection
techniques is recommended to reduce the volume of the existing
data, using only the attributes that contribute to a good data
analysis. This preparatory phase demands a high level of
knowledge of the information that is being worked with to prevent
important attributes that are initially considered irrelevant from
being eliminated.
392
The prototype used a public domain database containing
information on Brazilian automobiles. After the preparatory
phase, the final table consisted of 41 lines (including the name
and type of attributes) and 10 columns: brand, model, fuel, year,
color, price, number of doors, type, power and r.p.m. A small
sample can be seen in Table 1.
MAKE MODEL FUEL YEAR COLOR PRICE DOOR TYPE POWER RPM
STRING STRING CADEIA INT STRING REAL INT STRING INT INT
Fiat Uno gasolina 1993 Prata 6900 4 hatch 55 4000
Kia Sportage diesel 1995 Prata 40000 4 pickup 120 4000
Volkswagen Parati gasolina 1993 Branco 9400 2 wagon 99 5600
Table 1: Brasilian Car Data
4.2 Visualization Techniques
The 3D Scatterplot is the main technique used to visualize the
objects. In this graphic model, the 3D objects are positioned
according to x, y and z axis.
Each visualized object has specific characteristics of color, shape
and size that directly represent data items values, in order to
magnify the perception of the data. This characterizes the
implemented technique as multi-dimensional (information of x, y
and z axis, color, shape and size).
4.3 Augmented Graphic Interface
The graphic interface consists of continuous and discrete filter
controls and 3D scatterplot projected on marks. Each marker
position was carefully determined to avoid frequent ARToolKit
manipulation mistakes, such as undesired occlusion of markers.
During the execution, the user’s interaction with the graphic
interface of the prototype happens in a direct way, occluding the
marker where the desired virtual control is projected for a certain
action to be executed. The interaction by occlusion consists in
obstructing the capture of a marker by the webcam. The
obstruction can be done by any kind of material capable of
overlapping part of a marker symbol. A good suggestion is the use
of one’s own hands to perform this action.
4.3.1 Using Filter
The developed filters were base don the dynamic queries concepts
and support both discrete and continuous attributes. Dynamic
queries allow the users to perform queries in a dataset without the
need for command lines, using exclusively graphic interface
components [Shneiderman 1994].
The discrete (or nominal) attributes are usually used as setting
options such as color, size and shape. Continuous attributes are
excellent candidates for axis representation. However, every
continuous attribute has a related interval selection control,
whether or not it is mapped to one of the axis (Figure 2). The
prototype presents graphically the filter operations results in real
time.
Figure 2: Continuous attribute filter – Power.
4.3.2 Details on Demand
There are three forms of representation available: color, shape
and size, but there is still more information to be analyzed
about each object. A virtual mechanism was developed to
select a virtual object and present extra information (Figure 3).
Figure 3: Retrieving information on an object.
393
4.3.3 Semantic Zoom
The prototype already presents zoom, rotation and translation
mechanisms. They are available on the menus which are
appropriate to virtual and augmented reality applications.
Additionally, the user may analyze the chart freely with the
marker in his/her hands. Semantic zoom allows the user to
observe the virtual objects in greater detail as his/her view
approximates the objects.
4.3.4 2D Charts
The 2D charts help the user providing new information on the
visualized data. There are two types or charts available:
histogram and pie. The pie chart for the attribute Fuel may be
seen in Figure 11.
Figure 11: Pie chart for the attribute Fuel.
4.3.5 Help
The help item presents the user in detail the operation of each
marker. The use of help is very easy. With the use of the virtual
pointer, the user selects the help option. The user should then
select one of the menu items and read the available information
about it. In order to disable the help command, the user selects the
help item another time (Figure 12).
5 Final Remarks and Future Work
This paper presents a prototype for a multidimensional
information visualization tool in an augmented reality
environment. The AR environment provides a more intuitive and
motivated interaction for the user. It also allows the user to
manipulate the environment while interacting with other users in a
collaborative fashion. The prototype aims to satisfy the main
characteristics of a good visualization tool: overview, filter,
details-on-demand and semantic zoom. The input is currently
supported as text files but the development was generic enough to
be adapted to any relational database. Other remarkable aspect is
the implementation of menus in the mark cards. This allows a
larger set of functionalities with the use of a lower number of
markers. It is possible to set in real time axis, color, size and
shape parameters, generating many views for the same
environment. The use of dynamic queries allows the user to
generate any combination of queries and filters without the need
for command lines. The prototype also allows the use of 2D
graphics to provide complementary information about visible
data. Additionally, two implementation aspects contributed to
make the interaction with the 3D virtual objects a lot easier: the
virtual pointer and the help about virtual components in the AR
interface.
The main difficulties in the development of the prototype were:
the instability of ARToolKit, specifically in environment
lightening and marker detection; the comprehension of API such
as OpenGL, especially when it comes to sequences of
transformations; and the need for advanced hardware – a 128mb
video card, for example.
As future work we intend to refine and optimize the code for
publication in a website. It is also our intention to use a data glove
to manipulate the objects and use the marker only to include 3D
objects on the real scene. Incorporate the support for database
access and generate multi-user collaborative version are also
among our future goals. It could be studied the addition of
another webcam to enlarge the user eye vision using two video
monitors. Finally, a next step will be to perform usability and
ergonomics tests comparing with similar desktop tools. 