In 1998, WHO launched a new, high profile campaign to
Roll Back Malaria, with the stated goal to halve malaria
deaths worldwide by 2010.1 Achieving that goal requires
preventive interventions (eg, insecticide-treated bednets,
household insecticide spraying), but the main difference
between life and death for malaria patients hinges on
appropriate treatments. Simply, each malaria case must
be promptly and accurately diagnosed, and treated with
an effective malaria drug.
However, with nearly half the time to the 2010 deadline
now past, progress on effective treatment is so inadequate
that Roll Back Malaria is failing to reach its targets. Far
from being on track to halve malaria deaths, WHO
acknowledges that “RBM [Roll Back Malaria] is acting
against a background of increasing malaria burden”.2
Of the several reasons that could cause malaria deaths to
increase, one stands out most prominently: drug resistance
in the deadly species of malaria, Plasmodium falciparum.
WHO now writes of “global malaria control . . . being
threatened on an unprecedented scale” by continued use of
outdated drugs such as chloroquine, which is ineffective in
most parts of Africa, and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, which
is becoming so.3 For example, in East Africa, surveillance
and clinical trial data show that up to 64% of patients given
chloroquine and 45% given sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine will
fail treatment, and those figures are climbing.4,5
When treatment failure becomes so frequent, malaria
deaths rise greatly, especially in children. In West Africa
(Senegal), results of a 12-year community-based study6
showed that the onset of chloroquine resistance at least
Lancet 2004; 363: 237–40
Royal Institute of International Affairs, London, UK (A Attaran LLB);
Division of Pharmacology, University of Cape Town, Republic of
South Africa (K I Barnes MD); Department of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, UK
(C Curtis PhD, C I Fanello PhD); Department of Parasitology, Prince
Leopold Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium
(U D’Alessandro MD); Malaria Foundation International, Atlanta, GA,
USA (M R Galinski PhD); Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Nairobi,
Kenya (G Kokwaro PhD); Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand (S Looareesuwan MD); Kenya Medical
Research Institute-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, Kenya
(M Makanga MBChB); East African Network for Monitoring
Antimalarial Treatment (EANMAT), Tanga, Tanzania
(T K Mutabingwa MD); Epidemiological Surveillance Division,
Ministry of Health, Kampala, Uganda (A Talisuna PhD); Institut de
Recherche pour le Développement, Dakar, Sénégal (J-F Trape MD);
Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of
Liverpool, UK (W M Watkins PhD)
Correspondence to: Dr Amir Attaran
(e-mail: aattaran@riia.org)
doubled childhood malaria death risk, and in some sites,
increased it up to 11-fold in the youngest children. In East
and southern Africa, the proportion of children dying
from malaria doubled as chloroquine and later
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine resistance took hold from the
1980s to the 1990s, even as deaths from other causes
declined.7 Elsewhere in Africa, chloroquine resistance
increased the proportion of admissions to hospital and
deaths from malaria by two-fold to four-fold.8
These links between drug resistance, treatment failure,
and finally death are not controversial. WHO concurs that
chloroquine resistance is a “very likely” reason why
childhood malaria deaths in Africa are increasing, and that
chloroquine “has become useless in most malaria-endemic
areas”.2,9 WHO further agrees that resistance to
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, which is often the replacement
for chloroquine, “is also widespread and its use [too] will
soon have to be discontinued”.9 That is borne out in
Kenya, where a decision 5 years ago (1998) to switch from
chloroquine to sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine treatment is
already faltering because sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine
treatment failure quickly reached dangerous levels.4,10
The demise of chloroquine and sulfadoxinepyrimethamine leave artemisinin-class combination
therapies (ACT) as the best treatment option. The main
reason for treating malaria with combination therapy is
the same as for AIDS, tuberculosis, and leprosy, in which
it is standard practice: patients given two (or more) robust
and highly effective drugs are less likely to encounter drug
resistance and fail treatment—which brings both clinical
and public-health benefits. These benefits have now been
shown in a large meta-analysis11 of nearly 6000 patients,
which shows that combining existing malaria drugs with
an artemisinin both reduces patients’ risk of treatment
failure (by 75%), while lessening the pool of infectious
parasites (gametocytes) that transmit the disease to
others. In studies done on nearly every continent,12–19 ACT
successfully treats 90% or more of patients. That level of
success can probably be maintained for a very long time,
since artemisinins have been used as Chinese traditional
medicines for 2000 years, with no observed resistance.20,21
The superiority of ACT is now so established that of the
five treatments WHO recommends for drug resistant
P falciparum malaria, four are ACTs (the other is a “shortterm solution” for countries that cannot use ACT
immediately).3 ACT is now the preferred policy for WHO
and the Roll Back Malaria campaign as a whole:
“Recently WHO has formulated policy that elevates
combination drug therapy to preferred first therapy for all
malaria infections in areas where P falciparum is the
predominant infecting species of malaria. Combination
therapy (CT) with formulations containing an artemisinin
compound (ACT) is the policy standard . . .”22
WHO, the Global Fund, and medical malpractice in malaria
treatment
Amir Attaran, Karen I Barnes, Christopher Curtis, Umberto d’Alessandro, Caterina I Fanello, Mary R Galinski,
Gilbert Kokwaro, Sornchai Looareesuwan, Michael Makanga, Theonest K Mutabingwa, Ambrose Talisuna,
Jean François Trape, William M Watkins
Viewpoint
THE LANCET • Vol 363 • January 17, 2004 • www.thelancet.com 237
For personal use. Only reproduce with permission from The Lancet.
However, WHO violates its own policy standard
regularly. Most African countries reluctantly cling to
chloroquine, sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, or the insignificantly better combination of chloroquine and sulfadoxinepyrimethamine, because ACT is ten times more expensive
and, therefore, unaffordable to them.2,23 When those same
countries seek financial aid from the Global Fund for
AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria (GFATM) to purchase
ACT, they are forcefully pressured out of it by governments such as the USA, whose aid officials say that ACT
is too expensive and “not ready for prime time”.24 WHO
acquiesces to this pressure to cut costs, and despite a
policy that names ACT as the gold standard of treatment,
WHO signs its approval when GFATM funds cheap but
ineffective chloroquine or sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine to
treat P falciparum malaria.
This series of errors is illustrated by several projects
currently supported by GFATM. Although GFATM
claims it supports only projects that use “proven and
effective interventions” and “interventions that work”, in
Africa in 2003, it allocated more funds to purchasing of
chloroquine and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine than to
ACT.25 In January, 2003 (funding round 2), Africa was
allocated US$16⋅1 million for ACT, $27·7 million for
chloroquine, and $10·8 million for sulfadoxinepyrimethamine (round 2). The corresponding amounts
for October, 2003 (funding round 3), were $2·2 million,
$2·4 million, and $0·5 million.26
These budgetary differences are not insignificant. The
unit price differences between chloroquine ($0·13),
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine ($0·14), and ACT ($1·00–
3·00) mean that patients given chloroquine and
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine will outnumber those given
ACT by at least ten to one.2 Since GFATM plans this
budget for countries where chloroquine and sulfadoxinepyrimethamine resistance in P falciparum is well advanced
(table), many patients with malaria will fail treatment—
and sometimes die.27
Senegal has switched in 2003 from chloroquine to
combination therapy for malaria treatment, but until this
change GFATM agreed to continue chloroquine
treatment, despite the known increase in child mortality
(two-fold to 11-fold) that it causes.6 In Kenya, GFATM
rejected the government’s request to finance ACT, but later
agreed to finance sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, despite
evidence that sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine treatment failure
exceeds 50% in some districts (eg, Kibwezi).4,28 In Ethiopia
and Uganda, GFATM agreed to finance the combination
treatment of chloroquine and sulfadoxinepyrimethamine—a pairing that WHO describes as “not
recommended”—while falsely insisting that its action is
“consistent with current treatment guidelines of WHO”.29,30
These are very obvious errors of scientific and medical
judgment; and although WHO might be expected to
spearhead a corrective intervention, the evidence suggests
that it instead exacerbated the errors. In Kenya, Ethiopia,
and Uganda, WHO’s country representatives reviewed the
funding proposals in which inappropriate drugs were
sought—and signed their approval. Those signatures
follow a declaration that WHO “has participated
throughout the . . . process” of developing the proposal to
GFATM, and that it “reviewed the final proposal and [is]
happy to support it”.31–33
These decisions are indefensible. For WHO and
GFATM to provide chloroquine and sulfadoxinepyrimethamine treatments in the countries we cite as
examples at least wastes precious international aid money,
and at most, kills patients who have malaria. If one takes
the measured increase in childhood malaria mortality that
follows P falciparum drug resistance (two-fold to 11-fold)
and extrapolates it to populations in which GFATM is
funding chloroquine or sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine
despite resistance (more than 100 million people in the
four countries we name), then at least tens of thousands of
children die every year as a direct result. Those patients
who survive will often become much sicker and require
retreatment, at some further expense of time and money.
We do not exaggerate to state that, based on the
outcomes, there is no ethical or legal difference that
separates them from conduct otherwise condemned as
medical malpractice (compare the case in which a doctor
or pharmacist who, like these institutions, knowingly
furnished treatments that failed perhaps 80% of the time,
while withholding the alternatives as “too expensive”).
These problems might be discounted as aberrations,
but for the evidence that they recur systematically. In
addition to the four countries we name here, a WHO
memorandum names five others where GFATM funded
chloroquine and where, less than 2 years later, governments must already re-evaluate and move toward ACT.3
Accordingly, there is often a disconnection between
official policy, which favours ACT, and the reality created
by WHO and GFATM, who routinely approve and
finance inferior drugs. It is essential to understand why
this has happened to repair the situation.
To begin with, WHO has failed to define the medical
norms for malaria treatment. Although there are carefully
crafted WHO model treatment guidelines for HIV/AIDS
and tuberculosis (the latter are in their third edition), to
date for malaria, recommendations are found only in
scattered WHO reports, rather than in official,
comprehensive WHO malaria treatment guidelines.34,35
The lack of any such norms handicaps poor countries,
who naturally hesitate to change their treatment policies
and request funding for ACT when that displeases the
powerful donor governments who warn them—usually in
private—that ACT is too expensive.2,24 The same lack of
norms also causes WHO to miss opportunities to
intervene and recommend ACT. That is probably why
WHO country representatives, poorly informed by
Geneva, gave approval to GFATM applications for
ineffective drugs that violate WHO policy.
In theory, the GFATM’s Technical Review Panel should
block proposals like this, but as the evidence shows, it often
approves ineffective drugs for funding. For example, the
panel approved Uganda’s GFATM proposal with praise
for “strategies based on best practices”, when in fact the
malaria treatment proposed (chloroquine and sulfadoxinepyrimethamine) is very plainly “not recommended” by
WHO’s experts.29,36 Such decisions seem puzzling, until one
realises that the Technical Review Panel is not actually a
“technical” review panel. The four malaria reviewers on the
Technical Review Panel are selected by a points-based
system, in which “technical knowledge . . . and ability to
judge whether proposals are . . . scientifically sound” count
for only 22% of that decision.37 By contrast, “familiarity
VIEWPOINT
238 THE LANCET • Vol 363 • January 17, 2004 • www.thelancet.com
Parasitological failure (%) Clinical failure (%)
Chloroquine Sulfadoxine- Chloroquine Sulfadoxinepyrimethamine pyrimethamine
Ethiopia 88 (82–94) ·· 79 (51–93) ··
Kenya 71* 23 (13–38) 64 (32–87) 8 (0–52)
Senegal 42 (24–59) 0 13 (10–16) ··
Uganda 41 (10–96) 17 (0–73) 28 (9–89) 10 (0–25)
Data are median (range). See reference 24 for original data sources and
methods, which vary. *Range not available.
Parasitological and clinical failure rates for P falciparum
malaria in some African countries, 1996–2002
For personal use. Only reproduce with permission from The Lancet.
with international processes and . . . partnerships” and
“familiarity with multisectoral approaches” count for twice
as much (44%), even though it is hard to know what those
criteria really mean.
The evidence therefore shows that the current practices
of WHO and GFATM are not adequate to safeguard the
best interests of patients with malaria. We offer several
recommendations for improvement.
Above all, WHO should publish malaria treatment
guidelines that countries can depend on as authoritative
norms. Those guidelines should consolidate and broaden
the knowledge in various WHO reports, in a single,
systematic presentation that is reviewed every year, and
that addresses clinical algorithms, diagnostic methods,
malaria case definitions, standard treatment regimens,
definitions of cure, and so on.29,38 WHO can do this for
malaria by copying its own actions on HIV/AIDS: first,
WHO convened treatment specialists to debate and write
the AIDS treatment guidelines, and second, it set the
campaign goal of treating 3 million AIDS patients in
developing countries by 2005.34,39 Importantly, that is the
opposite sequence to Roll Back Malaria, which, in 2003
still does not have the treatment guidelines to reach the
1998 pledge of halving malaria mortality in this decade.
Next, once they exist, WHO treatment guidelines
should be used to judge each proposal for malaria
treatment, so that only effective drugs receive GFATM
funding. Although this recommendation seems obvious,
neither WHO nor GFATM believe it is within their
mandate. Both agencies emphasise their roles as mere
advisers or funders, while emphasising that selection of
malaria treatments is properly done by countries—who, in
our experience, are often pressurised by aid donors.28 The
fact that neither agency believes it has the obligation to
intervene and ensure that lives and money are not wasted
is proof that a new entity is necessary.
We recommend that a new review committee be
created, which is composed of independent malaria
treatment experts, convened by WHO, and tasked by
GFATM to review each proposal seeking finance for
malaria drugs. This Green Light Committee (so called
because it controls the green light that lets a drug be
financed and supplied) has an exact precedent in
tuberculosis. In 2000, outside experts created a Green
Light Committee, with WHO support, to review countries’
proposals to fund drugs for multidrug-resistant
tuberculosis.40 Later, this Green Light Committee and the
GFATM integrated their procedures, and today, countries
wanting drugs for multidrug-resistant tuberculosis submit
applications to both the Green Light Committee and
GFATM in a single envelope, so that the technical and
financial decisions affecting treatment happen together.
The need for a similar malaria Green Light Committee is
undeniable, since multidrug resistance in malaria is much
more common than in tuberculosis.
Once the WHO treatment guidelines exist and the
malaria Green Light Committee is operational, its first task
should be to retrospectively review all GFATM-funded
countries in view of the guidelines. To let the full (usually 5
year) duration of financing run without updating the
standard of care, where justified by the evidence, would be
unethical. This retrospective review will be easiest for
countries where GFATM funding has been approved but
not yet disbursed (eg, Uganda), although it should also be
done for countries where disbursement is underway. If a
retrospective review finds that a country cannot use
chloroquine or sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine safely, and
instead requires costlier ACT, then GFATM should
entertain a supplemental funding proposal.
Finally, to ensure equally wrong-headed decisions do
not affect any intervention or disease again, GFATM
should return to its original principles—and make the
technical review panel a truly technical entity. Panelists
should be selected on the basis of 100% technical and
scientific knowledge, not 22%, as is true now.
None of these recommendations imply new implementation challenges for WHO and GFATM. Most have clear
precedents in the HIV/AIDS or tuberculosis field, which
means that equal treatment for malaria must be possible.
The scientific community must now watch future
developments closely, because numerous earlier warnings
have been ignored. In 1999, several authors wrote in
The Lancet to warn of an impending “malaria disaster”,
which is now apparent in rising malaria deaths.20 In 2000,
one of the authors (AA) reported that aid agencies were
funding ineffective malaria drugs, but the agencies denied
that accusation and forcefully opposed a proposal to link
technical review to funding decisions.41,42 Similarly, our
recommendation to create a malaria Green Light
Committee has not been answered, either affirmatively or
negatively, by WHO and GFATM in several months.
Rather, WHO has reiterated its earlier policy statements
favouring ACT—the same statements that were not
heeded through these many errors—and established a new
unit responsible for addressing tuberculosis and HIV drug
resistance—but not malaria.3,43
The weight of evidence leads us to conclude that a crisis
exists, characterised by institutional inadequacies that
result in good policies for malaria control not being
fulfilled. Although the inadequacies are easily rectified, a
risk exists that if WHO and GFATM do not act with
celerity, the reputations of both will be tainted such that
rich governments lose confidence and cease funding them.
That would deal a tragic blow not only to malaria
treatment, but also to the spectrum of efforts against
malaria, tuberculosis, and AIDS, which require and
deserve billions of dollars wisely spent. The evidence now
proves that money is often unwisely spent—very
dangerous evidence indeed—and no delay is tolerable in
fixing that.