Abstract
Feedback systems are useful to increase occupant awareness and disrupt their wasteful behaviors. The study presented in this paper explores the opportunity for feedback system designers to use information visualization to guide occupants to a desired option without reducing the occupant's control over the environment. In contrast to previous studies, we utilize spatiotemporal information visualization, that not only contradicts with occupants' initial choices but also presents the consequences of their choices. The information visualization is presented in a 1 to 1 scale, where the visualization coexists with the occupants over the office space in an immersive virtual environment. In total, 80 participants' data were collected. Two visualizations were presented to the participants, one relating to energy consumption and another relating to light distribution in the room. The results show that the information visualizations made the participants reconsider their choices. Our results also show that the energy consumption information visualization was more effective on guiding the participants towards an option that supported by the visualization, compared to the visualization that focused on room lighting. The results support the idea of using information visualization to drive occupant behavior towards desired outcomes and could help in the design of future feedback systems targeted at influencing occupant behavior.

Previous article in issueNext article in issue
Keywords
Information visualizationSpatiotemporal visualizationImmersive visualizationOccupant behaviorFeedback systems
1. Introduction
Occupants' choices, preferences and behaviors are the driving factors for energy consumption in the built environment. Research shows that building energy consumption is often linked to occupant behavior, which is also associated with energy waste [1]. Building systems, such as lighting systems, heating ventilation and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems, have been shown to directly affect occupants' mood, health and satisfaction. Fully automated and/or centralized systems could provide solutions to save energy and control the built environment. However, occupant preferences and satisfaction present a challenge as occupants are more satisfied when personal control is available. Occupants' thermal preferences [2,3] and lighting preferences [4,5] tend to vary from one occupant to another, which result in low satisfaction where building systems are centrally controlled [2,6]. Occupants do not always think about the consequences of their choices and usually focus on the fastest and easiest solution for that moment [7]. Furthermore, occupants' choices may not always be the most beneficial to their health and well-being. For example, when glare is present on a computer screen, which could be harmful to wellbeing, occupants might utilize other coping mechanisms and wait too long to adjust their lighting environment [8]. The relationship between an occupant and personal control is complex, especially considering that preferences, personalities, and knowledge affect occupants' choices [[9], [10], [11]]. However, occupants might be willing to sacrifice their comfort if they are more conscious of the effect of their choices on the environment [12]. This ability to overlook personal comfort creates an opportunity to positively affect occupants’ choices and behaviors.

With the goal of disrupting occupant behavior and influencing occupant decisions, feedback systems have been presented as solutions to increase awareness about the impact of occupant decisions on the environment [13,14]. Feedback systems allow occupants to easily understand the consequences of their actions on the environment [15]. These systems further act to re-educate occupants to minimize wasteful behavior. Feedback systems have been studied and implemented with some success, usually focusing on potential energy savings, resulting in 5–15% of energy savings [16,17]. These systems use different tools to deliver the feedback to a user, which include websites, emails, smartphone applications, and in-house monitors, and so on. However, various delivery methods could lead to varying impact on behavior and awareness [18]. It is critical for the feedback systems to be designed specifically for the type of building they are introduced. For example, commercial building occupants often do not have the financial motivation in their decision-making process, whereas financial incentives might be effective in modifying residential building occupants’ behaviors [19]. Beyond the building type and display methods, many characteristics, such as the intended strategy, data type, and data granularity also influence the design of feedback systems [20]. These systems often use Information Visualization (InfoVis, hereafter) as their main component to transmit information. InfoVis, defined as a data-driven visual representation that amplifies user cognition [21], has the potential to reach not only to experts but also novice data users. In fact, InfoVis is present in our everyday life, in our smartphone applications, bank statements, metro stations, newspapers and much more. Development of new technologies, such as augmented and virtual reality, allows us to explore new design possibilities for these feedback systems. In other words, these technologies allow the data and user to coexist in the same space. They also provide an immersive dimension, which is not currently used in feedback systems. This added dimension has proven to be beneficial in exploring large datasets [22] and in changing user perceptions [23].

Most feedback systems to date focused on increasing occupants' knowledge about their behaviors in order to motivate them to reduce their energy consumption. These systems do not usually focus on individual choices that occupants make. In other words, feedback systems usually present aggregated information instead of breaking down the information to specific moments of choice. Moreover, current feedback systems focus on showing historical or real-time data rather than the future consequences of occupants' choices. To address this gap, we studied the impact of a spatiotemporal InfoVis on occupants’ choices, with the goal to change their initial choices. Our goal is to drive occupant decisions toward choices that are supported by the presented visualizations. In an attempt to change occupant choices, we provided information that conflicted with the initial choices of participants by using visualizations that highlighted the negative consequences of their choices. The presented visualizations are integrated into the building context (single occupancy office) in a spatiotemporal manner, which allowed us to present the data in the same scale as the space in consideration, or a 1 to 1 scale while presenting the consequences of their choices over time. Considering the characteristics of the InfoVis we proposed to study, we have selected Immersive Virtual Environments (IVE) to generate the test scenarios. This paper is structured as follows. We review the existing literature in Section 2. Section 3 presents our methodology including the experimental setup, IVE workflow, experimental design and data analysis. Results follow in section 4, where we present our findings, followed by a discussion in section 5, where the limitations and future work are presented. Lastly, the conclusions are presented in section 6.

2. Literature review
When the effectiveness of feedback systems in disrupting occupant behavior is considered, four features can be highlighted: (1) presented data (e.g., consumption data); (2) feedback frequency (e.g., daily, weekly, monthly feedback); (3) data representation (e.g., bar charts, color maps, line graphs); and (4) communication tool (e.g., smartphones, emails, monitors). These features or characteristics influence the feedback system or InfoVis design and they contribute to the effectiveness of such systems. We discuss these four features and their effectiveness in different contexts in this section.

Presented data directly affect the feedback system design because the designer needs to consider the goal of the feedback and the place where it is going to be most effective. For example, “show-me” focuses on displaying the amount of water that goes through the drain while a person is showering. This InfoVis uses a LED strip to simulate an animated bar graph, which gets higher as the consumption increases [24]. Several factors are considered in these feedback systems, depending on the goals of the system and the context they operate in. In contrast to the water consumption data during shower where the feedback system can drive the attention of its user by using LED lights, feedback systems that are used to influence driving behavior must take into consideration driving safety, considering that distraction may cause an accident. For example, an on-board display presented the data based on the real-time driving or a summary of the trip that are easy and fast to read [25]. Another factor that influences the design of feedback systems is the granularity of data. Considering the granularity of data, feedback systems may present real-time data, hourly or daily data. For example, the Dubuque Water Portal collected data for every 15 min, however it only displayed hourly data because the data were updated every 4 h [26]. This is different from a system that presents real-time data, such as the eco-pioneer program, which used real-time feedback to show the energy consumption or the electricity tarrif rates using a system similar to traffic lights: a green light meant low energy consumption or off-peak consumption, yellow light meant medium energy consumption or “shoulder” rate, and red light meant high energy consumption or a high rate [27]. The difference in these systems are noticeable, for example, the traffic lights InfoVis approach showed real-time data, the InfoVis was designed to influence the user while executing an activity so the user takes into consideration the time they execute activities that have large energy consumption, such as washing and drying clothes, while the water portal had to rely on historical and comparison techniques using bar charts to incentivize occupants to reduce the overall water consumption in the house. A more disaggregated data can impact targeted individual users at the moment of action [24], while more aggregated data might focus on a group of actions that happened within a period [26] or target a group, such as a family [17]. This difference influences the impact of feedback systems. Literature shows that more disaggregated data is more beneficial to influence the user consumption, which can help users to understand their actions more effectively [28,29]. In addition to the influence on the targeted audience, disaggregated data influences the feedback since, for example, it can show the consumption of individual appliances rather than the energy consumption of the whole space [27,30], which allows the user to easily connect the feedback to an action. In this study, we use the office space in a virtual environment as the location to provide feedback because the occupants select their choices using available controls in the room, and their choices impact the environmental parameters. Using the room as the context of the InfoVis helps the user to better understand the impacts of their choices. Furthermore, since disaggregated information is more effective in helping users understand the impacts of their actions, we provide disaggregated information about how their choices would impact the lighting environment, as well as the energy consumption in the room.

Feedback frequency is another crucial factor for the feedback system's success. Feedback frequency is tied to system limitations or the design intent, which can dictate the frequency of feedback provided. For example, a paper based feedback system cannot be presented every day since it can be perceived as waste [31], or a system cannot show disaggregated data of appliance usage if the necessary energy meters are not available. A system focused on historical comparison is limited by the comparison methodology implemented, for example, in WattsBurning [32] the feedback was provided daily for each day of the week. Literature also shows that more frequent feedback is more effective than less frequent feedback [19,31] and real-time feedback can be more influential than non-real-time feedback [33]. Fischer [34] explains that a quicker or more frequent feedback allows the user to easily relate to the consequences of their choices or actions. Therefore, a feedback system focused around the consequences of the user actions or choices, as used in this study, has the potential to improve the user's understanding of the consequences of their choices and to direct their choices and actions towards desired settings.

Feedback systems often use InfoVis as a tool to transfer knowledge to occupants. Presented InfoVis varies from a numerical, or a functional approach to an artistic or an abstract approach that is more figurative. A feedback system that uses bar charts or line graphs to transmit the information can be considered to be more functional than abstract [17,35,36]. For example, Ueno, et al. [37] utilized bar graphs to show hourly consumption of appliances and a stacked bar graph to show overall daily consumption to facilitate comparisons of appliances’ hourly usages and overall daily consumptions. In contrast, an InfoVis that associates energy consumption with an image of a sea or a forest can be considered as figurative [32,33,38,39]. For example, WattsBurning feedback system used forest images, which varied from a green forest for low energy consumption to a burning forest image for high energy consumption. In the WattsBurning InfoVis, the designers aimed for emotional connection to incentivize users to reduce their energy consumptions [32]. Each approach, functional or figurative, has some limitations. For instance, a more functional approach might be more difficult for the user to understand the presented feedback [27], for example, it can be more difficult for a user to relate his/her activity to a Kwh value while a graphical representation or trees can be easier to grasp [27,38]. In this study, we try to use a combination of functional and figurative approaches by using functional 3D box graphs to present energy consumption information, and figurative light map distributions to present the lighting distribution in the room.

The medium used to display the feedback also influences the design of the InfoVis due to the strengths and weaknesses of the medium. Examples include paper based, web-sites, in-house-monitors and so on. Paper based feedback is commonly used in energy bills. For example, in a three-year study, Wilhite and Ling [40] designed an energy bill to make energy consumption information more accessible to occupants. To achieve this, their design focused on comparing the occupant's energy consumption against a baseline. The newly designed energy bills were able to increase occupants' awareness, which was then associated with 10% of energy reduction [40]. However, use of paper as a feedback delivery method may be considered as waste by the user [31] especially for feedback systems focusing on energy consumption and the environment. Displays or monitors give the ability to increase the feedback frequency, and directly connect to smart meters. Advantage of using monitors is that they may become part of the activities or resident behaviors, in other words the occupants' would frequently look into the information provided, which was demonstrated by Ref. [36] in a 12-month study. However, this effect was not observed in all participants. Other studies showed a fluctuation in the engagement of participants [36,41,42]. In addition to the traditional display solutions, such as paper--based solutions, web-sites, in-home monitors and smartphone-based solutions, new technologies, such as head-mounted displays, are also emerging and becoming widely available. These new mediums need to be evaluated in terms of their effectiveness in creating energy awareness and helping reducing user's energy consumption. We use immersive environments as the medium to present feedback to the user as it enables the feedback to be presented in the same scale as the physical environment, enabling the user and the data to coexist in the same space, which could improve user's understanding of the presented information.

A common trait among the above-mentioned studies is the ease of comparison, which might be based on personal averages, previous daily consumptions or consumptions of different users. The importance of this design trait is highlighted by Ref. [43]. Even though real-time feedback systems exist, these systems do not usually focus on the choices that occupants make. In other words, previous works do not demonstrate the future impact of a choice on consumption and/or on the indoor environmental quality in a space when the choice is made. Therefore, to influence the user at the moment of choice, this paper presents an InfoVis that combines the spatial context (e.g., data overlaid within the physical office space) with temporal information (e.g., lighting quality within a day), to enable participants to evaluate their choices by considering the future impact of their choices. In this paper, we explore a scenario where the user coexists with the data in the same space, which has not been studied in previous feedback systems, also letting the user to compare the available choices while interacting with the options available in the room. This way of presenting the feedback allows us to study the influence of feedback systems in the moment of choice and analyze if a user can be guided to pre-defined choices supported by the feedback system. This is crucial as a user can understand and visualize the impact of actions during the decision-making process.

3. Methodology
The objective of this study is to influence occupants' choices through the use of spatiotemporal InfoVis that shows the environmental quality and energy consequences of occupant decisions. Visualizations were designed with the goal of presenting the information that contradicts with user's initial choices and attempts to drive the choices to the one supported by the InfoVis. In other words, the InfoVis' goal was to contradict or not support the user's initial choice. Our visualizations were designed following the InfoVis wheel concept introduced by Cairo [44]. We designed them to be more intelligible, by focusing on the use of common or vastly used InfoVis techniques available in other InfoVis applications, having a minimum number of dimensions, and by amplifying redundancy among the displayed information. In other words, we aimed to use simple and common InfoVis techniques to provide an easy to understand InfoVis.

The space for the experiment was a single occupancy office room in a typical office building in Los Angeles, California. Participants were asked to enter the office and set the lighting of the room by adjusting the blind for natural light and the light switches for artificial light. It is important to mention that there was no particular view when the blind was open; just green grass and blue sky, in order to not influence the blind use as it is known that one of the main triggers of blind use is an attractive view outside [45]. Two different visualizations were presented, depending on the participants’ initial choice. If the participant chose natural light as the main source of lighting by opening the blind, we used an energy consumption related InfoVis to show the impact of heat gain on energy consumption (caused by the large need for air-conditioning in the building located in a Mediterranean climate). The goal was to contradict their choices and convince them to use artificial light. On the other hand, if the participant chose mainly artificial light as the lighting choice, we showed the illuminance levels in the room to demonstrate that the natural light was sufficient to illuminate the room. Again, the goal was to contradict their choices and convince them to use natural light. Our visualizations got updated in real time as soon as the user changed the lighting options available in the room.

The experiment was set to simulate choices at 9am, which was selected to represent the arrival time. Literature shows that arrival time is when occupants interact the most with lighting options in a space. In addition, visualizations showed the changes over time (i.e., 9am to 1pm). This interval was chosen for two reasons. First, to enable the participants visualize what would happen after they made their choices. Second, 1pm was selected to simulate a long leave, such as the lunch break. In other words, the 9am to 1pm represented a regular work morning. The visualizations are presented on Fig. 1 and described below.

Fig. 1
Download : Download high-res image (476KB)Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Energy-box visualization (top) and light-map visualization (bottom) as seen by the participant. The figures illustrate what was seen when the participants selected artificial light only, natural light only and both artificial and natural light (left to right).

Light-map InfoVis: Given our design objective, we planned the InfoVis to be part of the room, which was used as the spatial context. We used color maps or heatmap techniques to generate the light map InfoVis. The light maps used simulated illuminance levels in the room to show the impact of natural and artificial lighting. The simulation process is explained thoroughly below. The light maps were placed both at the desk level and at the floor level. The floor and the desk were selected to help the user to relate to the information, considering that in a work day the user would be sitting at a desk. In addition, the InfoVis was placed in two levels to add redundancy for following the easy-to-understand design principles. The light map InfoVis followed the changes in natural light from 9am to 1pm, which was displayed over a time period of 1 min. The 1-min time period was selected in order to minimize the discomfort associated (e.g., eye strain, disorientation, nausea) with using head mount displays, such as Oculus Rift® [46]. The objective of the light-map InfoVis was to visually communicate that the amount of natural light in the room was sufficient for the participant to execute their work, which was communicated based on the color scale of the light-map. The light-map InfoVis had an interactive component: InfoVis was updated every time that the user changed their lighting choices. This interactivity allowed the user to explore different lighting choices and compare the effect on the light distribution in the room. This InfoVis was only presented to the participants that initially selected artificial lighting in order to contradict their initial choice by enabling the user to visualize that the artificial lighting would not contribute much to the room illuminance once the blind was open, or that the natural light was adequate to illuminate the office space.

Energy-box InfoVis: Following the same design principle, and the goal of contradicting the participant's choice, we developed an InfoVis that highlighted the impact of heat gain on the energy consumption. The heat generated by the natural lighting is important considering the use of air-conditioning in buildings. For this, we utilized a box graph, which resembles a 3D bar graph that represented the artificial light energy consumption in yellow and the air-conditioning energy consumption in light-blue. It is important to note that the InfoVis used accumulated values. In other words, the number of boxes in the room would increase based on the energy consumption of each lighting choice available in the room. The energy-box visualization was selected to allow the user to easily compare the available choices by interacting with lighting choices. Two factors were taken into consideration for the use of boxes: familiarity factor (similar to an easy to understand bar chart) and room geometry, assisting the user to see the growth on energy consumption for each choice, the boxes geometry match with the room geometry. To add redundancy and highlight the impact of heat gain on energy consumption, we added orange arrows coming from the window to represent the amount of heat gain, which can be seen on Fig. 1, especially at the top right corner. Considering that the heat gain amount varies from time to time, the color of the arrow would get darker as the heat gain increased. Lastly, this InfoVis followed the same time frame as the light map (i.e., 9am to 1pm).

3.1. Model
The first step in the workflow was to design the single occupancy office. The office space has 13.5 square meters of area, and height of 2.7 m (Fig. 2). Revit® was used to build the precise room geometry (i.e., walls, ceiling, floor, window and door) and furniture (i.e., chairs, desk, and cabinets). Once this step was completed, the model was imported into Rhinoceros® to generate the data for the InfoVis.

Fig. 2
Download : Download high-res image (345KB)Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. The model of single occupancy office with no InfoVis (left: view from the door; right: view from the corner next to the window).

3.2. Simulations
The second step was to execute lighting and energy simulations for providing accurate data for InfoVis. To achieve this, the room geometry was imported into Rhinoceros® to use Grasshopper®, Honeybee®, and Ladybug®. These software solutions provide interfaces between the model and simulation tools, namely EnergyPlus®, Radience®, and Daysim®. EnergyPlus® was used to generate the data for the energy-box visualization while Radiance® and Daysim® were used to generate data for the light-map InfoVis. Once the simulations were set, the illumination data were imported as csv, for every 3 min and 5400 points on the floor and 406 points on the work desk surface. The time interval of 3 min was selected as the light map would be updated every 0.75 s without affecting the overall rendering performance of Immersive Virtual Environment (IVE) considering that the visualizations were displayed in total of 1 min. Once all the data were generated, Matlab® was used to generate the lightmap images, and then images were compressed into a video using Adobe Premier®. Energy and heat gain data were exported for every hour, and directly imported into Unity®. It is important to note that the room was simulated as a part of a building, in order to have the wall with the window as the only source of heat gain. Once this step was completed, light maps, and the data needed for energy-box visualization were imported into Unity® together with the room model.

3.3. Immersive Virtual Environment
Before the room model was imported into Unity®, geometry was optimized by reducing the number of polygons present. This action was taken to reduce the rendering time. It is important to mention here that the object geometry was not affected. UV maps were also generated based on the diffuse channel of materials. For this, photos of materials were used to increase the realism. Once the UV maps were created, normal, specularity, occlusion and displacement maps were generated to increase the realism. Texture maps increase the object realism but they also affect the overall brightness, or global illumination, meaning texture maps influence the light bounciness in the room, simulating the real-world. It is important to mention that this process also improves the rendering time. This is important since Oculus® recommends the IVE to run in a minimum of 75 frames per second to minimize motion sickness.

Once the model and textures were ready, they were imported into Unity® along with the light map, energy consumption and heat gain data. In Unity®, the model was integrated with a physical based sky map to match with simulation parameters (i.e., day, hour and sky conditions). Room location was set to Los Angeles to simulate the sky conditions. Room interactions were introduced and integrated with an SQL database to record the number of interactions, which was achieved through php and Xamp®. Once the interaction and the database integration were completed, an Oculus Rift® first person camera was added. In order to increase the scene realism, High Dynamic Range Rendering and tone mapping were used.

3.4. Experiment design
Considering that the study objective was to influence occupants' choices towards a specific option, the following experimental procedure was developed and implemented. Once the participants read the informed consent form approved by the IRB and agreed to participate in the experiment, they were asked to answer a pre-experiment survey, which inquired about the following: (1) Participant demographics: Questions relating to participant's age, level of education, background and gender and (2) Visual problems: Questions relating to any visual problem that could affect how a participant perceived lighting. In addition, a color-blind test was conducted to ensure that the participant would see the InfoVis as designed. If the participant was color blind, he/she was not allowed to continue with the experiment since the presented visualizations were not designed for the color-blind. Once the participant was qualified to take part in the study, the experimenter introduced him/her into a training environment that is designed to make them acquainted with the office interactions, and basic movements, such as walking and rotation. Other than the interactions and basic movements, the training environment did not have any similarity with the experiment environment.

Once the training phase was completed, participants were placed in the single occupancy office space, at 9am to start the experiment. This time was chosen to simulate the arrival; literature shows that most of the interactions between an occupant and lighting systems occur at arrival and departure [4,5]. In the office, participant was able to choose three types of lighting options: (a) natural light only, (b) artificial light only, and (c) both. Although, lighting systems in real-world may not operate in a binary manner (either fully open or close, or fully on and off), they were implemented in a binary fashion. This decision was made considering the objective to contradict the user's initial choice. Once the participant selected his/her lighting setting, he/she was asked to complete a reading task on the computer screen. The task was designed to ensure that the participant was satisfied and would be able to work with his/her lighting choice. Once the participant completed the task, one of the visualizations shown in Fig. 1 was presented to him/her depending on the initial choice. If the participant chooses only natural light, the energy-box InfoVis was presented to convince him/her not to use natural light due to the increased heat gain which caused increased energy consumption. If the participant had selected only artificial lighting, he/she would be presented with the light-map InfoVis to convince him/her to use natural lighting instead of artificial lighting by showing the levels of lighting on desk and office if the blind was open. In case the participant selected both the natural and artificial lighting, we showed one of the visualizations randomly, and the participant was expected to either turn off the artificial light or close the blind depending on the assigned InfoVis. Once the InfoVis was assigned to the participant, he/she would be presented with all the lighting choices and the impact of each choice on the office environment (either the illuminance levels or the energy consequences). For example, if the participant was placed in the energy-box InfoVis, he/she would be shown every possible choice for artificial and/or natural light options while showing how the presented InfoVis changed. The participants were explained what different components of the InfoVis represented before they saw the InfoVis. For the energy-box InfoVis, the experimenter explained that the yellow boxes represented energy consumption from artificial lights, the light blue boxes represented energy consumption from the HVAC system, and the arrows represented the amount of heat gain from the windows. For the light-map InfoVis, the experimenter explained where the light map was placed, and that the colors represented the intensity of light ranging from red for high intensity and blue for low intensity. Once the InfoVis was completed, he/she was placed back into 9 a.m. office set for their initial choice and then they were allowed to change or not the office lighting setting.

Whether the participant changed his/her choices or not, he/she was asked to execute a post-experiment survey, through which we collected the following data: (1) Reasons behind changing choices or not: Questions focusing on the reasons behind the participant changing or not changing their initial choice; (2) Understanding of the InfoVis: Questions measuring if the participant understood the information that was provided to him/her, and how easy it was for him/her to understand the presented information; (3) Willingness to take the presented information into consideration: Questions about if they would like to have the information presented on their everyday lives; (4) Environmental consciousness level: Questions to assess level of pro-environmentalism. The participants were thanked and dismissed once they completed the post-experiment survey.

3.5. Data analysis
We utilized different statistical methods to analyze the collected data. The statistical tests vary depending on the analyzed variable. We analyzed four types of data: (1) participant choice data, which is a categorical data based on the lighting choice selected by the participant; (2) direction of the new choice, which was set to −1 if they changed their choice to a direction that was not supported by the InfoVis, 0 if the participant did not change his/her choice, and 1 if they change to a choice supported by the InfoVis, therefore, a categorical data type; (3) number of interactions before and after the participant was presented the InfoVis, which is a continuous data. For the categorical data, the participant choice and the direction of choice, goodness-of-fit was used to understand if the choices were influenced after seeing the InfoVis. Linear regression was used to understand the relationship between the number of interactions (continuous type of data) before and after the participant was presented with the InfoVis.

4. Results
We collected data from 80 participants (30 female participants and 50 male participants). Each group (light-map or energy-box) had 40 participants with similar distribution of participants in terms of age and level of education. Considering the gender proportions between visualizations, we ran a two-tailed z-test to determine if the gender proportions between groups were similar. The z-test results (z-score of −0.136 and p-value of 0.336) show no significant difference for the gender proportions between the two groups. The average age of the participants in the energy-box group was 25.58 ± 4.22 years, and 24.15 ± 3.5 years in the light-map group, with no significant difference between the two groups (p-value of 0.1). Furthermore, all the participants were undergraduate or graduate students at the University of Southern California with no significant difference in the level of education between the two groups (p-value 0.86).

In order to analyze the collected data, we first investigated the participants’ choices before and after they were presented with the visualizations. The light-map InfoVis was intended to reduce artificial light use and promote use of natural light by opening the blind and turning off the artificial light. The energy-box InfoVis was intended to promote artificial lighting by closing the blind and turning on the artificial light. As shown in Table 1, their choices before and after the InfoVis were changed. We executed a goodness-of-fit test to analyze if the choices before and after were significantly different, which resulted in a p-value of 0.0056 for the light-map visualization and 0.00079 for the energy-box visualization.

Table 1. Participants' choices before and after the InfoVis.

Light-map InfoVis	Energy-box InfoVis
Both	Natural light only	Artificial light only	Both	Natural light only	Artificial light only
Before	26	0	14	4	36	0
After	25	8	7	2	26	12
We also analyzed the direction of change, which was divided into three categories: 1 when the direction of change was not supported by the visualizations, 0 when the participant did not change his/her choice, and 1 when the new choice was supported by the visualizations. Table 2 shows the amount of each directional change for each InfoVis. Then, we executed a goodness-of-fit test, which showed that the direction of changes was marginally significantly different, with a p-value of 0.053. This result indicates that effectiveness of the visualizations was somewhat different. As shown in Table 2, the energy-box InfoVis was more effective than light-map InfoVis.

Table 2. Directional change of the participants; change to a non-supported choice (−1), no change (0), and change to supported choice (1).

−1	0	1
Light-map InfoVis	5	27	8
Energy-box InfoVis	2	26	12
Using linear regression, we analyzed the number of interactions before and after the visualizations were presented to the participants. The linear regression model shows a significant relation between when the interaction took place (e.g., before or after the visualizations) and the number of interactions, with a p-value of 2.43e−11. In addition, the InfoVis shows a marginally significant relation to the number of interactions with a p-value of 0.0766. The average number of interactions before the InfoVis was higher than the number of interactions after the InfoVis, which is expected since it was the first time that the participant interacted with the office lighting. The standard deviations, also presented on Table 3, show the large variance encountered in this data. In other words, participants’ interactions with the space varied from one participant to another.

Table 3. Average number of interactions with the lighting system before and after the visualization.

Averages	St. Deviation
Beforer	After	Before	After
Overall	9.59	3.05	4.72	3.61
Light-map	10.5	3.75	3.80	4.37
Energy-box	8.67	2.35	5.38	2.52
We also collected qualitative data, as described in the methodology section. Participants agreed that the visualizations were easy to understand. In the survey responses, 70.83% answered that the InfoVis was either “extremely easy” or “somewhat easy” while only 29.17% judged the InfoVis to be “neither difficult or easy” or “somewhat difficult.” It is important to mention that none of the participants indicated the presented InfoVis was difficult to understand. The participants that have changed or not changed their initial choices had the same distribution of answers in terms of ease of understanding. However, the light-map InfoVis was found to be slightly easier to understand than the energy-box InfoVis. 28.75% and 51.25% of the participants answered positively, “definitely yes” or “probably yes,” respectively if they would like to have the InfoVis in real life. Also, when asked if they would be willing to use some type of InfoVis before making their decisions in general, 52.5% of the participants answered either “definitely yes” or “probably yes.” Furthermore, 73.75% responded they were willing to use InfoVis to make their decisions specifically about energy consumption or the room lighting. More participants indicated that they were willing to use the energy-box InfoVis (34 participants) then the light-map InfoVis (17 participants). Furthermore, the participants self-reported about the influence of the InfoVis on their choices. When the participants were asked if the InfoVis was useful in their decision making, 21.25% extremely agreed, 55.00% somewhat agreed, 17.50% neither agreed nor disagreed and 6.25% somewhat disagreed with the statement. In addition, the participants agreed that the InfoVis made them reconsider their choices: 23.75% strongly agreed, 47.50% somewhat agreed, 20% neither agreed or disagreed, 6.25% somewhat disagreed and 2.50% extremely disagreed with the statement. This high percentage indicates that the InfoVis made them reconsider their choices even if they did not change their choices. The questionnaire responses also show that the participants had a high level of environmental consciousness. In a scale of 0–5 to rate their environmental consciousness, the energy-box InfoVis participants had an average rating of 3.85 and 0.40 standard deviation, while the light-map InfoVis participants had an average rating of 3.86 and 0.47 standard deviation.

Participants were also asked to select all possible factors that influenced their choices before and after InfoVis, as shown in Table 4. Table 4 is divided into the type of InfoVis presented (i.e., light-map InfoVis and energy-box InfoVis), before or after they were presented with the InfoVis, and if they changed their choice or not. Although, the questions were the same, the answers were different before and after. It is important to mention that only the participants who have changed their choices were asked to select all the factors that influenced their choices. Table 4 shows that the participants had a preference for natural light; when the participants were asked if they have a preference for natural light: 52.50% strongly agreed, 27.50% somewhat agreed, 12.50% neither agreed or disagreed, 6.25% somewhat disagreed and 1.25% strongly disagreed with the statement. In addition, Table 4 shows a reduction in the number of participants who thought that the natural light was not enough after the light-map InfoVis was presented to them, as the light-map InfoVis was intended to show that natural light was sufficient to illuminate the room. The table also shows that most participants, who were presented with the energy-box InfoVis and changed their choices, considered energy consumption as a factor behind their choices.

Table 4. Possible factors that influenced participants’ choices before and after the InfoVis based on the survey responses. NA means they were not asked that particular question.

Sub-categories	Answer	No change group	Change group
Before InfoVis	Before InfoVis	After InfoVis
Light-map (27)	Energy-box (26)	Light- map (13)	Energy-box (14)	Light-map (13)	Energy-box (14)
Personal Preferences	My personal preference for natural light	13	25	2	9	2	5
My personal preference for artificial light	4	1	2	2	0	1
My personal preference for natural and artificial light	11	3	5	3	4	3
I prefer warm light colors (yellow light color)	6	11	1	6	1	3
I prefer colder light (blue or white light color)	4	4	3	0	3	1
Discomfort	I tried to avoid glare on the computer screen	9	3	2	2	1	3
The natural light was not enough to illuminate the room	10	2	5	2	2	2
The artificial light was not enough to illuminate the room	1	0	8	0	0	0
Outdoor Environment	Time of the day	3	11	2	7	2	4
The view	9	13	1	3	1	2
Other Factors	I based my choice on the executed task	0	5	1	3	2	4
I wanted to play with the environment	0	1	2	2	2	4
Based on my mood	1	10	2	5	0	1
Other	0	3	0	0	2	0
After Visualization Factors	I was not happy with my initial choice	NA	NA	NA	NA	1	4
I did not remember my initial choice	NA	NA	NA	NA	0	0
Energy consumption	NA	NA	NA	NA	4	9
The daylight cycle	NA	NA	NA	NA	2	2
Presented information	NA	NA	NA	NA	5	8
5. Discussion
Even though only one third of the participants changed their initial choices, the statistical analysis shows that the presented InfoVis had significant influence on the participants' choices. 71.25% of the participants agreed that they reconsidered their choices based on the presented InfoVis. Although the number of participants, who changed their choices were similar in both visualizations, the effectiveness on guiding the participants to a certain choice was different. The results show that the energy-box InfoVis was more effective in guiding the participants towards a desired outcome than the light-map InfoVis (Table 2). 83% of the participants who were in the energy-box InfoVis group indicated that they prefer natural light (23 strongly agreed and 10 somewhat agreed). Of those who preferred natural light, 11 participants in the energy-box visualization changed their choices and 10 of these participants closed the blind even though they said they prefer natural light. In other words, majority of the participants who changed their initial choices went against their preferences. The difference between the two visualizations can be explained by their design, specifically on the message and the data used to generate the visualizations. While light-map InfoVis showed the consequences of participant choices over illuminance levels of the office room, the energy-box InfoVis showed the consequences of the choices on the room's energy consumption. The difference in the effectiveness of two InfoVis can be explained by the level of environmental consciousness of the participants or their desire to use less energy [47,48], as all of the participants had high degrees of environmental consciousness. This association is important since it shows building occupants might be willing to sacrifice their preferences and change their choices if they know it is for a greater good, such as reducing greenhouse gas emissions, as also mentioned by Ref. [12]. The light-map InfoVis participants also preferred natural light. This improved the light-map InfoVis' effectiveness since this visualization's aim was to encourage use of natural light.

The statistical analysis showed that the number of interactions were influenced by the time when the interaction occurred (i.e., before or after the visualizations). Since it was the first time that a participant interacted with the environment, the average number of interactions before the InfoVis was significantly higher than after the InfoVis, which is expected. However, it is important to point out that the average value for the number of interactions were close to or bigger than the number of options available in the room after the InfoVis, as shown in Table 3. This supports the finding that the InfoVis influenced the participants’ decision making while they were selecting their choices. This is also supported by the questionnaire results, which showed a high percentage of participants (76.56%) were willing to use the presented information to make their choices or reconsider their choices after seeing the presented InfoVis.

When evaluating the factors considered by the participants to select their choices before and after the visualizations, as shown in Table 4, we see a difference among participants that were presented with the energy-box InfoVis and light-map InfoVis. The participants who were in the energy-box group had a higher preference for natural light than the participants who were placed on the light-map group. This difference is expected due to the intent of conflicting the choices to cause a change based on the initial choices. However, the number of participants who reported their preference for natural light as a factor behind their choices decreased after they were presented with the energy-box Infovis and they changed their choice. A similar pattern can be observed for the participants who changed their choices and were in the light-map InfoVis group. The number of participants who expressed that the natural light was not enough to illuminate the room decreased after they were presented the light-map InfoVis, which was designed to show that the natural light was adequate. This supports the idea that the InfoVis might have influenced the participants to reconsider their choices despite their initial beliefs or preferences. Another factor that supports this conclusion is the fact that participants selected the ‘presented information’ and/or ‘energy consumption’ as the reasons for their decisions after they saw the visualizations. The number of participants who selected the presented information was a factor behind their choice was slightly higher for the energy-box InfoVis than the light-map InfoVis. In addition, energy-box InfoVis group selected more factors related to its message than the light-map InfoVis group. However, there was no clear difference in how easy it was for the participants to relate their choices to the presented InfoVis. It seems that the participants in the energy-box InfoVis were more influenced by its message than that of the light-map InfoVis. This could have happened due to the high pro-environmental values of the participant pool, as mentioned in section 4.

Overall, the results of this study show that immersive InfoVis can be used to influence participants' choices. The results indicate that feedback systems can be more effective in promoting pro-environmental behavior if they are designed to highlight the consequences of user's actions on the environment, even when their initial preferences might not be pro-environmental. Furthermore, showing the future implications of user's choices on energy consumption or the indoor environmental quality in an immersive fashion seems to be a way to prevent users from making choices that may not be desirable. By designing an InfoVis to show the negative consequences of undesirable choices, we may be able to guide a user to a choice that is desired by a designer or facility manager in order to reduce energy consumption or to improve indoor quality of the built environment. The visualizations presented in this study had different objectives, one supporting blind to be closed and artificial lights to be used and another the opposite. Although we observed that both of the visualizations influenced the participants' choices, there is still room for improvement. Even though we followed the best practices in designing these visualizations, we did not specifically evaluate the effectiveness of each design characteristic. The effectiveness of the InfoVis can be further improved if user personality is also considered in the InfoVis design. Another limitation of this study is that the participants mainly consisted of students from the University of Southern California. Since the participants were of similar age and education level, we were unable to analyze the impact of age, experience and level of education on the study outcomes. Future research can focus on the impact of different personal characteristics, such as age, education level, personality traits, on the compliance and effectiveness of immersive feedback systems on a larger population. Lastly, we cannot conclude if having the feedback at the moment of decision would lead the participants to change their behaviors, since a long-term study is needed for this type of conclusion. Future studies should consider the effectiveness of using similar feedback systems over the long term and how showing the information in immersive environments (e.g., augmented reality) can affect the users' behavior in the real world.

6. Conclusions
This study aimed at influencing occupant choices at the moment of decision by showing the future consequences of their choices. The goal of this study was to evaluate the effectiveness of using information visualization to drive occupant behavior toward certain choices. We presented two visualizations and evaluated their effectiveness in influencing participants' choices. Both visualizations included the building's spatial context and they were presented in a 1 to 1 scale, therefore exploring the concept of people and data coexisting in the same space. In addition, the presented visualizations used temporal data, allowing participants to evaluate the consequences of their lighting choices in the near future instead of focusing on historical or real-time data. We observed a significant difference in participants' choices before and after they saw the visualizations, which shows that InfoVis can be an effective way to provide feedback and influence user's choices. We also observed a marginally significant difference (p-value 0.053) in the number of participants that selected a desired option after they saw the visualization, which indicates that InfoVis can not only result in a change in user's choices but could also change their choices in a direction that is desirable based on the InfoVis design regardless of their existing preferences. Both of the visualizations were effective in influencing participants' lighting choices. However, the energy-box InfoVis was more effective in guiding the participants to the choice supported by the InfoVis compared to the light-map InfoVis. This difference could be attributed to the fact that energy consumption is generally associated with sustainability, which could have led the participants to reconsider their choices in support of being more sustainable. From the survey results and the number of interactions, the presented visualizations seem to have influenced the participants' decision-making processes even when it did not result in a different choice. Furthermore, 71.25% of the participants reported that they reconsidered their choices after the InfoVis was presented and 76.56% of the participants reported that they were willing to use the presented information while making their choices, which supports the idea of presenting the information in an immersive manner from a user acceptability perspective. Thus, the use of such Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) based feedback systems can help in driving occupant behavior towards more pro-environmental options.