Abstract— Current Electronic Medical Records (EMR)
systems contain large amounts of texts and various
tables, to show numerous health data. This type of
presentation limits people from promptly determining
medical conditions or quickly finding desired information
given the large volume of texts that needs to be read.
We aim to tackle this as information visualization and
extraction problems by creation of easy and intuitive
user interfaces for visualizing medical information. We
present both a novel graphical interface for visualizing
a summary of medical information and an information
extraction system that is able to extract and visualize
the patient’s medical information from structured clinical
notes. The graphical interface allows spatial-position
based representations of medical information on human
body images (front and back views) and temporaltime based representation of it through interconnected
time axes. Medical histories are classified into several
event categories and 6 physiological systems to enable
efficient browsing of selected information. To extract
visual tags from a given clinical note, we use natural
language processing. We employ Metamap of 2014AA
knowledge source for medical information extraction.
We trained 1294 English clinical notes with a TimeEntity Detection model by Apache OpenNLP to abstract
the time expressions. Extracted location of illness is
assigned into one of 6 physiological systems is displayed
in spatial interface while the related data are denoted on
a horizontal timeline of temporal interface.
Keywords—Information Extraction, MetaMap, Information Visualization, EMR, Tag of Medical Information,
Pictorial User Interface
I. INTRODUCTION
Medical records serve as a central repository of
patients’ medical histories and play an essential role
in patient care. A report from the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services (CMS) indicated that approximately 80% of eligible hospitals and more than 50% of
professionals have adopted EMRs. Nevertheless, their
acceptance in clinical practice continues to lag behind
their potential and expected outcomes because the medical data that accompany EMRs are often voluminous,
complex, disorganized [1] and difficult to integrate.
Given the alarming rate at which the volume of medical
records is growing, important information is constantly
difficult to obtain, thereby seriously hampering a physician’s diagnostic reasoning and the efficiency with
which he/she works. Because of the limited time that
healthcare professionals can devote to receiving data,
reviewing and extracting the records that they need in
a few minutes are challenging tasks.
Current EMR systems have not realized their full
potential as digital information sources where medical
data can be structured to maximize the convenient
extraction of target information. EMR systems should
enable physicians to quickly incorporate or retrieve various types of medical information, such as symptoms,
diagnosis, lab tests, treatments, medications and so
on. Information visualization (InfoVis) is one method
by which the value of electronically available medical
data can be maximized[2]. Given that InfoVis presents
medical data in intuitive, understandable, recognizable,
navigable, and manageable formats, users can rapidly
understand and extract useful information from large
978-1-5386-4618-2/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
amount of records.
Popular commercial EMR systems, such as EpicCare [3], Allscripts [4], and eClinicalWorks [5], offer
functionality for problem lists, electronic prescriptions,
allergy checks, medication management, order management and billing. These systems therefore contain
various texts, such as documents, orders and notes. A
frequent mode of visualization in commercial EMR
systems is the flowsheet, which is widely used in
intensive care units (ICUs). It contains key medical
variables for a single patient over a given period and
thus emphasizes trends and abnormal values. Numerous
other systems, such as IBM Watson Health [6] and
Oracle Health Sciences[7], often include automated
analysis techniques that are based on machine learning
and data mining. Substantial medical information is
classified in ways that fail to satisfy physicians’ requirements for quick review of a patient’s medical history.
Current EMR systems facilitate the rapid incorporation
and collection of medical data but lack necessary functionalities for temporal queries and exploratory analysis
tasks.
Fig. 1. Medical Information Extraction and Pictorial Visualization
System
In this paper, we address a medical record summary
system that enables users to require the patient’s medical data which are visualized spatially and temporarily
based on categorization. The overall system is shown
in Fig. 1.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. Medical Data Extraction & Visualization
Patient’s medical records contains valuable information. Extracting, visualizing and presenting these
crucial medical data for diagnosis processing is necessary. Data extraction is important and the first step.
By building the logistic regression models trained by
manually annotated information, Zeng et al. [8] extract
medical data that doctors are interested in. Sabra, et al.
[9] established on semantic extraction from text-based
records. Similar to [8], by preparing the feature vector,
a classifier and an extractor are trained by machine
learning.
In addition, to realize medical data visualization and
presentation, in this paper [10], Michael et al. designed
3D medical graphical avatar(MGA), which has the
ability to explore web-based delivery of different type
of medical information, such as images, videos, and
text-based data.
B. UMLS and Metamap
The Unified Medical Language System[11] (UMLS)
is a compendium of many controlled vocabularies in
the biomedical sciences (created 1986). UMLS contains three tools (Metathesaurus, Semantic Network,
SPECIALIST). The Metathesaurus is a very large,
multipurpose, and multi-lingual vocabulary database
that contains information about biomedical and health
related concepts, their various names, and the relationships among them. It transcends the specific thesauri,
vocabularies, and classifications it encompasses. The
Metathesaurus is organized by concept or meaning.
It links alternative names and views of the same
concept and identifies useful relationships between
different concepts. Furthermore, the Metathesaurus is
linked to the other UMLS Knowledge Sources the
Semantic Network and the SPECIALIST Lexicon. All
concepts in the Metathesaurus are assigned to at least
one Semantic Type from the Semantic Network. This
provides the consistent categorization of all concepts
in the Metathesaurus at the relatively general level
represented in the Semantic Network.
Metamap developed by Dr. Alan (Lan) Aronson at
the National Library of Medicine(NLM)[12] is a powerful tool to recognize UMLS concepts in clinical notes.
It has the ability to map biomedical text to UMLS
Metathesaurus or, equivalently, to discover Metathesaurus concepts referred to in text. In our system, we
use Metamap 2014AA and its corresponding Java Api
to implement information extraction.
III. PICTORIAL VISUALIZATION OF
MEDICAL INFORMATION
The medical records are categorized into multiple
classes to be visualized in two given interfaces, one for
spatial interface which is position based representation
and the other for temporal interface which is time-based
representation of medical information.
A. Spatial - Position based representation
In a spatial medical record, illness or diseases location is organized in accordance with its physiological
systems. We categorized 6 physiological systems and
combine its relevant images with font and back views
(Fig.2);
• Musculoskeletal/Dermatological
• Cardiovascular/Respiratory
• Gastrointestinal
• Nervous
• Immune/Endocrine
• Genitourinary.
As long as the illness and human body part information extracted, the data would be spatially presented
over its corresponding location with a circle on its
relevant physiological system image (Fig. 3). The colors indicate which physiological system it belongs to.
Black circles means symptom where a physiological
system is still unknown. In addition, a whole-bodyproblem image would be used (marked as (A) in Fig. 3)
if the illness has no a specific location, like Myasthenia
Gravis.
B. Temporal-Time based representation
Temporal medical records deal with time related
data, where medical histories are displayed like a
data sheet enabling visualization of information and
evolution of health on time. A temporal summary can
serve as the entire medical record, but details can
only be accessed separately. The categories are such
as visit, medical imaging, medication, lab test and
treatment. They are presented on the timeline with
different icons. Fig.4 shows a sample of Temporal-Time
based representation.
IV. METHODOLOGY FOR INFORMATION
EXTRACTION
The spatial and temporal interfaces are classified
medical information visualization for summary of medFig. 2. Display of physiological systems in front and back views.
The diseases are partitioned into 6 physiological systems[13] that
the information can be easily accessed on the basis of disease
groups.
Fig. 3. Spatial Interface - Position-based medical information on a
2D representation of the human body. The colored circle shows the
location of symptom and diagnosis of specific physiological system.
e.g. red circle means the diagnosis belongs to musculoskeletal
system. Whole-body problem is indicated separated in (A).
ical notes. Therefore we require our classified information extracted from an existing clinical note to
display it on our interface. We employ Metamap for
medical information extraction. First we convert the
text plain notes to XML format as a pre-processing.
Apache OpenNLP[14] is applied for training the entity
detection model with 1294 clinical notes from i2b2.
Fig. 1 illustrates how the system works.
In many clinics and hospitals, most of the paperbased clinical notes are structured in a regular and
general pattern in forms with titles and subtitles. Fig.
5 shows an example of structured clinical notes. Currently, our system mainly focuses on structured data
extraction.
Fig. 4. Information timeline display. The horizontal line denotes
time information, and the icons represent different medical events.
The button at the bottom show duration timelines and major
diseases.
Fig. 5. A structured clinical notes sample
A. Format Conversion Preprocessing
We applied the regular regression and keywords
detection as shown in Fig. 6, to detect titles, for section
boundaries segmentation. The segmented text plain
notes are then converted to XML format for next further
processing. A XML format is shown in figure 7.
Fig. 6. Keywords of titles and boundaries detection and corresponding XML annotations. ( | and & represent logic operations)
B. Tokenization
Tokenization plays an important role in Natural Language Processing. Words tokenization and sentences
tokenization convert a sequence of characters into a
sequence of words and sentences separately. Apache
OpenNLP which contains several pre-trained tokenizer
Fig. 7. XML format notes from Fig. 5.
models has the abilities to achieve this task. We employ en-token.bin[15] and en-sent.bin for words and
sentences tokenization respectively in our system.
C. Stopwords Removement
In computing, stop words are words which are filtered out before or after processing of natural language
data[16]. In the English language, stop words generally
refers to the most function words, such as the, am, is, a
and so on. A set of comprehensive English stopwords
lists[17] is available on the Internet and we use one to
filter the clinical notes for the further process.
D. Metamap Setting
We applied the Metamap with 2014AA knowledge
source and its corresponding JAVA API for extracting
medical information such as discharge and admission
medications, past and present illness, future treatments
and even physical examinations. For different medical
data extraction, Metamap has different set-up options
as shown in Fig. 8.
Fig. 8. Metamap option settings of the medical information
In the medication extraction part, the extracted specific semantic types are clnd[18] and orch, which
are represented by Clinical Drug and Organic Chemical separately. The CHV and NLMSubsyn vocabulary
sources, meanwhile, are excluded in this part.
E. Recognition of Time-Entity Expression
Named-entity recognition (NER) (also known as entity identification, entity chunking and entity extraction)
is a subtask of information extraction that seeks to locate and classify named entities in text into pre-defined
categories. The information of time is crucial for the
caregivers to know about the patient’s past and present
situation. By using Apache OpenNLP with manually
labelled sentences collected from 1294 clinical notes
from i2b2, we trained a Time-Entity Expression model
to detect time information. The following shows the
labelled data.
• On <START:time> 6/28 <END> the patient was
seen in the MFM practice and a wound hematoma
• he patient has had numerous intubations and an
ICU stay from <START:time> March <END>
to <START:time> August 2005 <END> due to
• He was taken to the Charl Lubspi Hospital by
EMS on <START:time> 8/7/2007 <END>, and
the patient
V. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
We manually labeled 1980 sentences with time expressions from 1294 clinical notes. Among them, 1386
sentences were used to train Time- Entity Detection
model. By detecting the boundaries of titles, the notes
are segmented and converted to XML format with
hierarchical information. Metamap has a strong ability
to recognize UMLS concept for extracting medical information. The following is an example of the extracted
results by employing Metamap.
Input Notes:
Mrs. Wxxxx is a 45-year-old woman with multiple familial cavernous hemangiomas. She is righthanded. She was in her usual state of health until one
and a half weeks prior to admission. She developed
an ear ache, for which she saw her primary care
physician, Evelyn was prescribed cortisone drops.
A few days later she complained of dizziness. This
was mostly described as feeling unsteady on her
feet. She stated that she had trouble knowing if her
feet were touching the ground. She was seen again
by primary care physician, Roderick since she had
complaints of dizziness, as well as a new complaint
of decreased hearing and the sensation of static in
her ears, meniere ’s disease was considered. She
was given an oral prednisone taper. This unsteady
gait progressed, and then she subsequently started to
develop a pins and needle feeling in the face, hands
and feet bilaterally. Her hearing got progressively
worse and the sound of static increased. She was very
fatigued. At an outside hospital, head CT revealed a
1.5 cm diameter hyperdense mass in the pons, slightly
off center to the right. She was transferred here for
further care
Output Data:
Diagnostic Procedure:
MRS (magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging)
Body Part,Organ, or Organ Component:
right handed (Structure of right hand)
Body Part, Organ, or Organ Component:
Feet (Foot)
Disease or Syndrome:
Hearing Decrease
Sign or Symptom: Ear ache (Earache)
Disease or Syndrome: Meniere Disease
Body Location or Region: FACE (Face)
Diagnostic Procedure:
Head CT (CAT scan of head)
Body Part, Organ, or Organ Component:
Pons (Pontine structure)
Time information is also extracted as shown in Fig.
9 and all extracted medical information is transmitted
to the pictorial visualization system for presenting data.
Fig. 9. The output extracted medical data with its relevant time
expression.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We developed a clinical notes information visualization system where medical data are extracted from plain
text clinical notes and described over the pictorial-based
interface. Thanks to Metamap, the patient’s medical
data are extracted from text notes. The Time-Entity
Expression model that we trained by Apache OpenNLP
help us detect time-related data and its relevant date
information. In the part of pictorial visualization of extracted medical data, illnesses or diseases are presented
on its corresponding physiological system image. Simultaneously, the information associated with time is
summarized on a timeline by chronological order. In
a nutshell, our system helps users rapidly access and
understand the patient’s history and present medical
information.
There are a plenty of unstructured clinical notes
which contains the patient’s important information.
Since unstructured notes do not follow any predefined
structure, they are not easily interpreted by the software
program to do further processing. However different
sections still describe specific features. For example,
one area has a plenty of clinical drugs and chemical
substance and we consider it as medication section.
Also, names of human body parts and human organs
show up in physical examination part. Applying deep
learning on unstructured clinical notes is our ongoing
work.