Geospatial Health 5(2), 2011, pp. 151-168

The use of remotely sensed environmental data in the study of
malaria
Vanessa Machault1,2,3, Cécile Vignolles3, François Borchi4, Penelope Vounatsou5,6, Frédéric
Pages1, Sébastien Briolant1, Jean-Pierre Lacaux2, Christophe Rogier1,7
1

Département d’Infectiologie de Terrain – Equipe 7 “Maladies Emergentes et Moustiques” Unité de Recherche sur
les Maladies Infectieuses et Tropicales Emergentes (URMITE) UMR6236, Institut de Recherche Biomédicale des
Armées, Allée du Médecin Colonel Jamot, 13262 Marseille Cedex 07, France; 2Observatoire Midi-Pyrénées,
Laboratoire d’Aérologie, Centre National de le Recherche Scientifique, Université Paul Sabatier, 31400 Toulouse,
France; 3Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales, Service Applications et Valorisation, 31401 Toulouse Cedex 9,
France; 4METEO-France, Direction de la Climatologie, 31100 Toulouse, France; 5Department of Public Health
and Epidemiology, Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, P.O. Box, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland; 6University
of Basel, P.O. Box, CH-4003 Basel, Switzerland; 7Institut Pasteur de Madagascar, 101 Antananarivo, Madagascar
Abstract. Mapping and anticipating risk is a major issue in the fight against malaria, a disease causing an estimated one million deaths each year. Approximately half the world’s population is at risk and it is of prime importance to evaluate the burden of malaria at the spatial as well as the temporal level. The role of the environment with regard to the determinants of
transmission and burden of the disease are described followed by a discussion of special issues such as urban malaria, human
population mapping and the detection of changes at the temporal scale. Risk maps at appropriate scales can provide valuable information for targeted control and the present review discusses the essentials of principles, methods, advantages and
limitations of remote sensing along with a presentation of ecological, meteorological and climatologic data which rule the
distribution of malaria. The panel of commonly used analytic methods is examined and the methodological limitations are
highlighted. A review of the literature details the increasing interest in the use of remotely sensed data in the study of malaria, by mapping or modeling several malariometric indices such as prevalence, morbidity and mortality, which are discussed
with reference to vector breeding, vector density and entomological inoculation rate, estimates of which constitute the foundation for understanding endemicity and epidemics.
Keywords: malaria, urban malaria, indicators, environment, remote sensing, satellites, statistics.

Introduction
Malaria is an infectious disease caused by parasites
of the genus Plasmodium, transmitted to humans by
the bites of infected female mosquitoes of the genus
Anopheles. With more than 200 million of cases and
about one million of deaths each year, the disease is a
major public health problem (WHO, 2010). Indeed,
although efforts have been made to collect and centralise existing entomological, parasitological and epidemiological data in Africa (MARA/ARMA, 1998;
Coetzee et al., 2000; Hay et al., 2000; Hay and Snow,
2006), a high degree of uncertainty still exists regarding the annual number of malarial cases and their geographical distribution (Sullivan, 2010). Insufficient
Corresponding author:
Vanessa Machault
Observatoire Midi Pyrénées, Laboratoire d’Aérologie
14, avenue Edouard Belin, 31400 Toulouse, France
Tel. +33 561 33 27 22 ; Fax : +33 561 33 27 90
E-mail: vanessamachault@yahoo.com.br

epidemiological or parasitological data are the rule in
many endemic countries, while entomological data are
rarely collected continuously in a given area, and
when field studies are undertaken, they provide only a
snapshot of a continuous phenomenon.
At the local scale, the concept of transmission units,
focused on the Anopheles breeding sites, can be
described as a system promoting targeted interventions
as more effective than random control measures (Carter
et al., 2000). A focus on the most productive breeding
sites can lead to significant reductions, not only in adult
mosquito productivity but also of the incidence and
prevalence of malaria (Gu and Novak, 2005), and dedicated risk maps at appropriate scales can provide valuable information for selective malaria control.
Anticipating future risk and incidence is critical to
success in the fight against malaria. The history of
malaria early warning systems (EWS) goes back to 1921
when the intensity and distribution of epidemics in
India were forecasted based on absence of the disease in
the previous 5 years, rainfall anomalies from July to

152

V. Machault et al. - Geospatial Health 5(2), 2011, pp. 151-168

August, and the local price of wheat used as a proxy for
people’s nutritional status (Gill, 1923). In the 1950s, the
introduction of insecticides led some to the false belief
that the launch of the Global Malaria Eradication
Program (WHO, 1955) would eventually be successful
and would make any EWS unnecessary.
Due to the vector-dependent transmission of malaria, the environment plays an important role in determining vector distribution and malaria biodiversity
(Guthmann et al., 2002; Ernst et al., 2009). Climate
seasonality, rainfall patterns, temperature, humidity
and the presence of vegetation and surface water all
are directly related to the malaria transmission cycle.
In addition, human activities such as agriculture, irrigation, deforestation, urbanisation, population movements, dam/road constructions and wars, are also connected to transmission levels and malaria epidemiology (Thomson et al., 1996; Beck et al., 2000; Bergquist,
2001; Patz et al., 2004; Ceccato et al., 2005).
Malariometric indices include the presence and persistence of Anopheles breeding sites, larval densities,
aggressiveness or the human biting rate (HBR), the
mosquito prevalence of Plasmodium infection, the
entomological inoculation rate (EIR) as well as malaria prevalence, morbidity and mortality in the human
population.
Remote sensing (RS) refers to the collection of data
by instruments measuring physical and biological
characteristics of some objects without direct contact.
For example, sensors on board satellites record electromagnetic radiation reflected or emitted by the
Earth surface. Passive sensors record natural radiation, whereas active RS, such as radar, emits signals
and measures the radiation that is reflected or
backscattered from the target. Even if satellite sensors
are not dedicated to recording data regarding infectious diseases, remotely sensed information can provide useful indirect information, e.g. geo-climatic, ecological and anthropogenic factors related to malaria
transmission levels and patterns. Thus, since the first
studies in the 1970s and 1980s (Cline, 1970; Hayes et
al., 1985), public health has benefited from the growing availability of remotely sensed data. Forty years
later, we are at a junction when RS has come into its
own and is ready to assist epidemiological research on
malaria at all levels, as well as disease control.
Determinants of malaria burden
The completion of the malaria life cycle depends
critically on the mosquito developmental cycle that
can only be completed under favourable conditions.

Surface water collections, whose availability is mainly
driven by land use/land cover characteristics and rainfall are a must but water bodies can only harbour
Anopheles mosquito larvae if conditions (salinity, turbidity, sunlight, temperature, etc.), are acceptable.
Determinants of presence of larvae and larval density
depend on the mosquito species, e.g. An. gambiae s.l.
usually breeds in small, temporary, clear and shallow
water collections with small amounts of organic matter and surface vegetation (Gillies and Coetzee, 1987),
but it can also adapt to polluted water (Awolola et al.,
2007). Under laboratory conditions, the rate of development of An. gambiae s.s. from one immature stage
to the next increases at higher temperatures to a peak
around 28 °C, after which it declines. The range of
optimum adult emergence is between 22 °C and 26 °C
with complete inhibition below 18 °C or above 34 °C
(Bayoh and Lindsay, 2003). The adult mosquito survival rate, another key factor in malaria transmission,
is driven by climatic factors, such as temperature and
relative humidity as well as land use and land cover
characteristics. Depending on the conditions, vectors
can survive from a few days to several months.
Dispersal or flight range is also an important determinant of malaria patterns (Killeen et al., 2003). Land
use and land cover characteristics impact dispersal,
which is generally lower (<300 m from the breeding
site) in highly-populated urban settings (Sabatinelli et
al., 1986; Trape et al., 1992; Manga et al., 1993;
Robert et al., 1993) than in open rural areas, where it
can reach several km for some species (Charlwood and
Alecrim, 1989).
The duration of the gonotrophic cycle, i.e. the time
between two ovipositions, is a physiological process
that depends on mosquito species and air temperature.
It usually ranges from 2 to 3 days in tropical regions
(Mouchet et al., 2004). The duration of the
gonotrophic cycle regulates the mosquito population
and, thus, also the HBR. The duration of the sporogonic cycle, the process that produces the Plasmodium
sporozoites which can be inoculated during the mosquito bite, depends on the parasite species and the air
temperature. Depending on the Anopheles species, at
25 °C, the duration can be about 10 days for P. vivax,
13 days for P. falciparum and 18-20 days for P. ovale
and P. malariae (Mouchet et al., 2004). Slightly higher temperatures lead to shorter cycles. Malaria epidemiology is also strongly related to the vector species
which can have various vector competence, i.e. ability
of Anopheles to transmit the parasites.
The relationship between ecological factors and the
malariometric indices is strong but it is weighed by

V. Machault et al. - Geospatial Health 5(2), 2011, pp. 151-168

several biotic factors. For example, immunity moderates the link between environment and malaria transmission and human-vector contact can be decreased
thanks to insecticide-impregnated bednets, one of the
major tools used in current malaria control.
Remote sensing
Satellite-based imagery is characterised by spatial
and temporal resolutions. On one hand, various
Earth-observing satellites, e.g. WorldView (http://
www.digitalglobe.com/index.php/88/WorldView-2),
Quickbird (http://www.digitalglobe.com/index.php/
85/QuickBird), Ikonos (http://www.geoeye.com/
CorpSite/products-and-services/imagery-sources/) or
SPOT-5 (http://www.spotimage.com/web/en/172-spotimages.php), are equipped with instruments providing
high or very high spatial resolution images (down to
<1 m). On the other hand, their temporal resolution
can be low and the revisit time can reach several days
or weeks. The same goes for the radar platforms, such
as TerraSAR-X (http://www.infoterra.de/terrasar-xsatellite) and RADARSAT-2 (www.radarsat2.info/
about/features_benefits.asp). In contrast, low-resolution platforms, such as Meteosat (http://www.eumetsat.int/Home/Main/Satellites/MeteosatSecondGenerati
on/index.htm?l=en), the Geostationary Operational
Environmental Satellites (GEOS) (http://www.oso.
noaa.gov/goes/), the Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectroradiometer (MODIS) (http://modis.gsfc.nasa.
gov/), onboard the Terra and Aqua spacecrafts, or the
National
Oceanographic
and
Atmospheric
Administration Advanced Very High Resolution
Radiometer (NOAA AVHRR) (http://noaasis.noaa.
gov/NOAASIS/ml/avhrr.html), can provide images of
the same place once or several times a day. As a consequence, environmental indicators necessitating precise spatial measurements can be derived from the
high-resolution sensors, while indicators that require
temporal evaluation, such as vegetation or rainfall,
can be derived from the low-spatial resolution satellites. In the latter case, studies would cover a whole
country or even a continent but the spatial resolution
could be insufficient for local applications (Beck et al.,
2000). Images are also characterised by their spectral
resolution, i.e. the range of wavelengths that can be
recorded, which will condition their ability to detect
various objects at the Earth surface. Thus, the choice
of images depends on the study objectives and on the
spectral, temporal and spatial resolution criteria needed. In general, low-spatial resolution imagery is free or
inexpensive, in contrast to high resolution images. A

153

detailed list of past and present orbiting satellites is
provided by the Geospatial Data Service Centre
(GDSC) at http://gdsc.nlr.nl/gdsc/information/earth_
observation/satellite_database.
In order to produce a thematic representation of an
area on the ground, the images can be subjected to
classification (http://www.ccrs.nrcan.gc.ca/glossary
/index_e.php?id=47). This can either be “supervised”,
meaning that that the user guides the image processing
software to classify certain features by using vector
layer containing training polygons, or “unsupervised”
where the software does most of the processing. The
latter approach generally results in more categories
than needed and the user has to decide which categories can be grouped together into a single land use
or land cover category. New forms of classification
have been developed based on object-oriented techniques (as opposed to pixel representation) that are
particularly well adapted for very high-spatial resolution image analysis. This approach allows incorporation of information of the spatial neighbourhood and
it does not only rely on information from a single pixel
(Corcoran et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2010). In addition, some mathematical operations can be undertaken on images to combine the values of different spectral bands of the same pixel in order to calculate ecological indices, e.g. vegetation or humidity. Some satellite products already contain processed information
such as rainfall quantities or temperature values.
Other images are delivered in raw format and their
pixels contain radiance data in different spectral bands
in which case, they must be processed with appropriate software such as ENVI (http://www.ittvis.com
/ProductServices/ENVI.aspx) or ERDAS IMAGINE
(http://erdas.com). Geographical information systems
(GIS) represent a general way of integrating spatial
data (satellite-based or not) as layers (overlays) that
can be visualised by a computer. Within the GIS, data
can be comprehensively displayed and a wide range of
analyses, including one or more layers, can be performed to highlight relationships, patterns or trends.
Data can also be extracted from the GIS and processed
by statistical software to fit models that can, for example, be used for producing risk maps.
Remotely sensed environmental malaria indicators
Temperature
Temperature is one of the main indicators as it influences all parts of the malaria transmission cycle. Land
surface temperature (LST) can be estimated from ther-

154

V. Machault et al. - Geospatial Health 5(2), 2011, pp. 151-168

mal infrared (IR) sensors. MODIS-Terra (https://
wist.echo.nasa.gov/api/), Meteosat, GEOS and
AVHRR provide both day and night temperatures.
LST correlates well with the prevailing temperature of
the air, but land cover, humidity, atmospheric conditions and the period of the day can introduce aberrations (Connor et al., 1997; Cresswell et al., 1999;
Colombi et al., 2007; Vancutsem et al., 2010).
However, a study comparing remotely sensed LST
with ground data interpolated from meteorological
stations concluded that the annual mean LST corresponds to the air temperature in Africa within a range
of +/- 4 °C (Hay and Lennon, 1999). Another article
reports a significant correlation between the LST and
ground observations both in Africa and Europe, with
root mean square errors of around 2 °C (Green and
Hay, 2002). Thus, the raw LST data are useful but
conclusions should be drawn with care.
Rainfall
Rainfall has a spatio-temporal influence on breeding
sites and can also improve adult survival by creating a
favourable humid microclimate for the adult mosquito.
It can be directly measured but also evaluated by indirect methods. The cold cloud duration (CCD) can be
derived from Meteosat thermal IR imaging (Dugdale
et al., 1991) and provides rainfall estimates based on
the length of time a cloud top is below a threshold
temperature. The Tropical Rainfall Measuring
Mission (TRMM; http://trmm.gsfc.nasa.gov/) satellite
provides near-real-time direct measurement of rainfall
in tropical areas based on passive microwave and
active radar sensors, which closely matches ground
rain gage observations (Sharma et al., 2007; Han et
al., 2010), even in urban areas (Hand and Shepherd,
2009). Nevertheless, the influence of location, climate,
topography, time period, cloud types and rainfall types
can affect accuracy (Barros et al., 2000). In addition,
TRMM rainfall data can overestimate rainfall during
the pre-monsoon season, and in arid regions, but
underestimate it during the monsoon season, and in
humid regions (Islam and Uyeda, 2007).
Elevation
Elevation generally correlates positively with precipitation and negatively with temperature and can be used
as surrogate indicator. Several digital elevation models
(DEMs) give information at different resolutions, e.g.
gtopo30 provides a worldwide, 30 arc-second (about 1
km) DEM (http://eros.usgs.gov/#/Find_Data/Products_

and_Data_Available/gtopo30_info), while the Shuttle
Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) supplies maps at
90 m resolution (http://www2.jpl.nasa.gov/srtm/). In
addition to elevation, other information, e.g. wetness
index (soil moisture), curvature and heat load index
(solar radiation) can be extracted from DEMs (Li et al.,
2006). Curvature measures the convexity or concavity
of the land surface and is an indicator for the possible
accumulation of water.
Land use and land cover (LULC)
The LULC is related to the natural environment and
to the impact of human activities on the landscape.
Despite their differences, land cover and land use are
often mapped together. Land cover refers to characteristics of the biophysical Earth surface (e.g. water, vegetation, bare soil, artificial structures) (Sarma et al.,
2008), while land use reflects human activities such as
agriculture, forestry and urban development. The
LULC is directly related to the malaria burden
through its impact on breeding sites and on the adult
mosquito survival rate and dispersal. LULC maps can
result from any classification process of images and
some are directly available thanks to various global
mapping projects, such as the Corine Land Cover
(http://www.eea.europa.eu/themes/landuse/interactive/clc-download).
Surface water and soil moisture
Surface water and humidity appears on optical
images but microwave sensors have a high potential
for detection. The breeding sites can be described as
specific objects based on their ecological characteristics after the water bodies have been detected (Lacaux
et al., 2006; Vignolles et al., 2009). Soil moisture
measurements can be used as surrogate values if direct
detection of breeding sites is impossible when they are
too small or covered by surface vegetation. The near
infrared (NIR) and short wave infrared (SWIR) bands
are of particular interest for water and moisture mapping as they are very sensitive to the humidity contained in vegetation and soils. Several satellites, such
as SPOT-5 or Landsat (http://www.landsat.gsfc.nasa.
gov/), contain spectral information in these wavelengths that can be used independently, or in combination with other bands to calculate indices such as
the normalized difference water index (NDWI) for
which different versions exist: NDWI Gao (Gao,
1996), NDWI McFeeters (McFeeters, 1996) and
NDWI modified (Xu, 2006).

V. Machault et al. - Geospatial Health 5(2), 2011, pp. 151-168

Humidity
The relative air humidity has a primary impact on
the presence and persistence of breeding sites and on
adult mosquito survival rate. This indicator can be
extracted from other meteorological factors as
detailed in Beugnet et al. (2009), but it should be used
with care. Indeed, air humidity is a function of air
temperature, so it can change significantly over the
course of the day. It also strongly depends on elevation.
Vegetation
Vegetation plays an important role for vector larval
development and improves adult mosquito survival by
providing resting sites. The normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI), defined in 1970 (Rouse et al.,
1973; Tucker, 1979), is the most commonly used index
for human health applications. It integrates the effects
of temperature, humidity, rainfall, sunshine, altitude
and LULC (Britch et al., 2008). It can be used as surrogate for precipitation in certain periods and areas
(Justice et al., 1991). The NDVI varies from -1 to +1
based on the vegetation optimum absorbance in the
red wavelengths (R) and maximum reflection
of
near infrared radiation (NIR), i.e. NDVI =
(NIR -R)/(NIR + R). Since NDVI not only depends on
land cover but also on atmospheric conditions, there is
no strict threshold for vegetation detection.
Nevertheless, a value superior to 0.2 usually corresponds to an area covered by vegetation and negative
values correspond to water, general infrastructures or
asphalt. Several low-resolution instruments, e.g.
MODIS and AVHRR, provide NDVI values but it can
also be calculated by combining the appropriate spectral bands of any high-resolution image.
“Inventive use” of satellite indicators
As mentioned above, satellite imagery can serve as
proxy for environmental factors when direct detection
is not possible. It can also be used as proxy for other
types of characteristics, e.g. socio-economic factors,
housing type or quality, which can indirectly relate to
the level of access to antivectorial protective devices or
to health care. For example, the brightness of remotely sensed night time lights data has been showed to be
a robust proxy for assessing poverty in Africa, which
in turn relates closely to health status (Noor et al.,
2008). With respect to malaria, a study in South
Africa, used the distance to the Mozambique border as

155

proxy for migration from that country, i.e. importation of malaria cases (Kleinschmidt et al., 2001).
Analytical techniques
Once all relevant spatial information has been
extracted into a GIS, analyses can be carried out to
evaluate the associations between various environmental factors and malariometric indices. For example, principal component analysis (PCA) (Jolliffe,
1986) is a useful approach for transforming a large
number of possibly-correlated variables into a reduced
number. As environmental variables are often correlated, PCA includes all variables thereby avoiding the
risk of losing part of the information (Lawpoolsri et
al., 2010). Then, algorithms such as hierarchical classification or “K-means clustering” can generate environmental classes based on those principal components (Chamaille et al., 2010). Because the principal
components are linear combinations of initial variables, the interpretation of groups is easy and intuitive.
Discriminant analysis is effective in the field of spatial epidemiology (Beck et al., 1994, 1997). It relates
closely to PCA but has the advantage of permitting the
prediction of new observations. Partial least square
(PLS) regression (Wold et al., 1984) can also be considered when using collinear variables. Ecological
niche factor analysis (ENFA), which introduces habitat suitability (Hirzel et al., 2002), can be calculated
with Biomapper (http://www2.unil.ch/biomapper
/index.html) and is a “presenceonly” model to be used
when no “absence data” are available. Also other
“presence-only” models exist, such as maximum
entropy or genetic algorithms (De Meyer et al., 2010),
and these are of interest since they do not require independence of covariates.
Statistical models such as linear, logistic, Poisson or
negative binomial regressions model the relationships
between environmental factors and malariometric
indices. The choice of regression depends on the type
of data to model (dichotomous or continuous outcome, proportion or rate), each implying different
mathematical formulas to link the environmental factors and malariometric indicators. The advantage of
these analyses lies in their prediction possibilities.
Indeed, once a model is fitted, the results can be
extrapolated to predict the outcome for unsampled
observations by inversion of the regression formula
within the range of the values of the fitted data.
The basic requirement for using classical statistics is
the independence of observations. In a spatial context,

156

V. Machault et al. - Geospatial Health 5(2), 2011, pp. 151-168

this prerequisite is not always fulfilled because the
observations that are close in space can be more similar than those that are distant. Neglecting this spatial
autocorrelation in the analysis may produce underestimation of the standard deviations resulting in overestimation of the strength of the associations that may
lead to spurious correlations (Thomson and Connor,
2000). Indeed, there are actually fewer independent
observations in real life than might be assumed. For
example, 87% of the variability in tsetse densities
studies in Kenya was explained by RS but, after
accounting for the spatial autocorrelation, these
results were no longer significant (Kitron et al., 1996).
Spatial autocorrelation among outcomes means
presence of a systematic pattern in the spatial distribution of the variable, something that can be assessed
using Moran’s I (Moran, 1950) or Geary’s C statistics
(Geary, 1954). Moran’s I is a global indicator, whereas the Geary coefficient is more sensitive to differences
in small neighbourhoods. The spatial variations can
also be investigated by nonparametric D statistics
(point pattern analysis), which is defined as the average absolute difference in data ranks over all possible
pairs of adjacent spatial units. Because weighting
favours pairs of areas in close proximity, a low
D value implies the presence of spatial correlation
(Walter, 1994).
A number of modeling approaches can be used
when taking spatial dependence into account and
location-specific covariates and error terms (random
effects) can be introduced to describe geographical differences in the mean of the outcome. On the one hand,
multilevel models can be employed to analyse correlation in malariometric indices nested within larger
units, e.g. persons within a household or households
within a village (Matthys et al., 2006b; Vanwambeke
et al., 2006; Baragatti et al., 2009), while, on the other,
geostatistical spatial models (Diggle and Tawn, 1998),
or conditional and simultaneously autoregressive
models (Cressie, 1993), incorporate explicitly spatial
correlation as a function of distance or neighbour
structure of data. They allow assessment of disease
determinants in the presence of spatial correlation, as
well as smoothing and prediction. Spatial models can
be formulated within the framework of generalised
linear mixed models (GLMM) (Kleinschmidt et al.,
2001) but the model fit is complicated when the number of parameters is large (Gemperli and Vounatsou,
2004; Gosoniu et al., 2006). However, GLMM spatial
models have been applied in malaria mapping using
Bayesian formulations to overcome parameter estimation through Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)

simulation. Predictions at unsampled locations are
enabled by Bayesian kriging based on geostatistical
regression models. Indeed, Bayesian models are
increasingly used for mapping of malaria and tropical
diseases in general (Steinmann et al., 2007; Silué et al.,
2008; Raso et al., 2009; Haque et al., 2010; Riedel et
al., 2010). Appropriate software, such as OpenBUGS
(http://www.openbugs.info/w/) is available for fitting
spatial Bayesian regressions. Several techniques have
been used, such as Fourier analysis to assess seasonality (Hay et al., 2006), autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) (Abeku et al., 2002), or derivatives of the former (ARIMAX) (Wangdi et al., 2010),
can be applied to estimate temporal patterns and
obtain short-term forecasts. It should be noted that
some results can be produced using methods such as
fuzzy logic (Snow et al., 1998) or neural networks
(Kiang et al., 2006).
In classical statistics, accuracy can be measured in
several ways. The model assessment refers to estimation of the precision of the model, and it expresses
how well the model fits the data. In classical statistics,
this precision is provided by the standard error
(Atkinson and Graham, 2006). In this context,
Bayesian modeling has the great advantage of being
capable to estimate the parameters and the predictions
as posterior distributions rather than as single values
(Brooker, 2007). Hence, for each predicted observation, the upper and lower Bayesian credible limits are
known, permitting the creation of maps with the prediction error. To compare model-based predictions
with the “real” values, measurements of the agreement can be given by overall accuracy, sensitivity and
specificity, positive and negative predictive values,
area under the receiver operating characteristics
(ROC) curve or the correlation coefficient. When
there is no “gold standard” but only two sets of values, Kappa statistics can estimate the level of agreement, taking into account agreement obtained by
chance only. In Bayesian statistics, the predictive ability of models can be assessed using a Bayesian “pvalue” analogue calculated from the predictive, posterior distribution (Gosoniu et al., 2006). A list of accuracy metrics has been provided by Rogers (2006).
RS and malaria
The growing availability and precision of remotely
sensed data has encouraged their use in the study of
several infectious diseases (Thomson et al., 1997; Hay
et al., 1998; Kitron, 2000; Randolph and Rogers,
2000). With regard to malaria, remotely sensed envi-

V. Machault et al. - Geospatial Health 5(2), 2011, pp. 151-168

ronmental data can be linked to a wide range of malariometric indices, i.e. larval and vector densities, aggressiveness, EIR, parasite prevalence and malaria incidence as it will be showed in the following examples.
Breeding sites
The launch of the Landsat-1 satellite in 1972
marked the start of malaria risk mapping. The data
are increasingly accurate as shown in Thailand where
remotely sensed data delivered environmental data as
reliable as those collected on the ground
(Vanwambeke et al., 2007). Sometimes, the mapping
of breeding sites relies on prior knowledge of the environments favourable for the larval development and
the risk is deducted from the mapping of those ecosystems. For example, in Burkina Faso, potential highrisk and low-risk malaria areas at the village level were
predicted using 2.5 m resolution SPOT-5 imagery. The
potential breeding sites were mapped following a
supervised classification and malaria risk levels were
deducted from the presence of breeding sites in the
surroundings of each village (Dambach et al., 2009).
Mapping can also be attempted on the basis of collected entomological field data, and associations have
been found between the presence of larval habitats and
the results of image classifications at a range of different spatial resolutions (Rejmankova et al., 1998;
Sithiprasasna et al., 2005a; Mushinzimana et al.,
2006; Stoops et al., 2008; Mutuku et al., 2009). In
addition, RS can also bring knowledge about breeding
habitats, e.g. in Thailand, where differences in habitat
preferences of An. minimus A and C were characterised using remotely sensed ecological data
(Rongnoparut et al., 2005).
An interesting application of the mapping of larval
habitats was undertaken in South Korea around two
military camps, using a decision support system
(Claborn et al., 2002). Retrieval of larval habitats in
need of pesticide treatment was achieved by the processing of Landsat images, the derived cost was calculated and compared with the cost of providing antimalarial chemoprophylaxis to the individuals allowing
the choice between the two control methods.
Another methodology, also applied in South Korea,
relied on photo-interpretation of Landsat and Ikonos
images for the mapping of rice fields and other potential breeding sites for An. sinseni around two military
camps. In this case, some pools were better detected
with high-resolution Ikonos images (1 m resolution),
even if no SWIR band was available (Masuoka et al.,
2003). An example from the Kenyan highlands, which

157

represents a very heterogenic ecosystem, is of interest
in this connection, since the photo-interpretation of
Ikonos images allowed the detection of 41% of the
water collections, whereas the Landsat images (30 m
resolution) did not provide any useful information
(Mushinzimana et al., 2006). Indeed, the authors of
this study stated that object detection is feasible only
when the object size is at least 1.5 times larger than the
pixel size. In this work, visual detection results could
have been coupled with statistical results to improve
the detection rate. Sometimes, classification methods
provide better results than photo-interpretation
(Mutuku et al., 2009).
In addition to optical satellite images, radar imagery
has also been exploited for the mapping of breeding
sites, taking advantage of radar superior capacity to
detect water and humidity, overcoming acquisition
problems caused by cloud cover. In Mali, temporal
profiles of rice fields, provided by eight ERS-2 SAR
images (12.5 m resolution), highlighted the relationship between radar images and the development of rice
plants, which in turn is coupled with Anopheles larval
density (Diuk-Wasser et al., 2006). Other studies have
focused on temporal predictions. One of the first
papers published in the field of vector diseases and
remote sensing was a study done in California, USA,
where the most productive An. freeboni rice fields
were mapped 2 months before larval density peaked
(Wood et al., 1991). Predictors included extensive vegetation at the beginning of the season (measured by a
Landsat image) and livestock proximity, measured by
mapping the pastures using IR aerial photography.
Vector density
The densities of larvae and adult mosquitoes are
closely related. Indeed maps of larval habitats can be
exploited for the prediction of vector densities as in
Belize, where An. albimanus larval habitats are often
located where water and sparse vegetation meet, and
where these habitats have been mapped using the classification of a 20 m resolution SPOT image
(Rejmankova et al., 1995). In the same country, the
indoor presence of An. pseudopunctipennis was predicted by processing the SPOT image together with
topographic maps from which the presence of rice
fields, their distance from houses, the difference of elevation, and the presence of forest between fields and
houses were extracted (Roberts et al., 1996). In both
these studies, the predictions were validated thanks to
mosquito ground collections. In Camargue, a marshy
area in the south of France, larval- and adult-stage

158

V. Machault et al. - Geospatial Health 5(2), 2011, pp. 151-168

An. hyrcanus were mapped using a Landsat image.
Each pixel of the resulting map contained the probability of the presence of larvae depending on biotope,
distance to the first rice field and larvicide intervention
(Tran et al., 2008). Here, the flight range was not predefined but rather deducted from research on the best
correlation between ground-measured adult densities
and larval probabilities in a range of buffers of different sizes. The vector density mapping can lead to
applications such as the definition of areas that require
indoor insecticide spraying (Rakotomanana et al.,
2007). A reverse approach consists of measuring adult
mosquito densities to define the ecosystems most
favourable for larval development. In Mexico, a
Landsat image allowed identification of ecosystems
associated with adult An. albimanus densities around
40 villages (Beck et al., 1994).
RS also produce information on the distribution of
Anopheles species or molecular forms such as in Mali
where the presence of the Mopti form of An. gambiae
s.s. has been correlated with low rainfall either in the
study month, or in the previous month (Tourre et al.,
1994), or with low NDVI values (Thomson et al.,
1997). Also in Mali, Bayesian modeling made it possible to produce maps of the spatial distribution of
An. gambiae s.s. and An. arabiensis (Sogoba et al.,
2007) or of chromosomal forms of An. gambiae
(Sogoba et al., 2008), based on climatic and environmental factors (rainfall, minimum and maximum temperature, NDVI, soil, water storage index, distance to
water bodies and suitability to transmission). On a
larger scale, satellite imaging has been used to predict
the distribution of five of the six An. gambiae complex
species that are responsible for much of the malaria
transmission in Africa (Rogers et al., 2002).
EIR and parasite prevalence
Scientists have investigated the associations between
ecosystems and Plasmodium EIR. In Kenya, An. gambiae and An. funestus aggressiveness and EIR have
been predicted using a model based on land cover, soil
type, soil moisture, surface-water availability and a
combination of multiple weather parameters (Patz et
al., 1998). In The Gambia, An. gambiae s.l. EIR was
estimated in villages using breeding site areas and distances mapped using Landsat images (Bogh et al.,
2007). In the same country, a model was fitted using
the EIR in villages and a map of breeding sites issued
from a classification of a SPOT image (20 m resolution). Extrapolation of the model allowed the prediction of transmission levels in other villages (Thomas

and Lindsay, 2000). Here, parasite prevalence in the
villages correlated with the EIR. Nevertheless, whereas EIR can be linearly linked to larval and adult densities, the relationship between vector populations and
the incidence or prevalence of malaria depends not
only on transmission levels but also on other factors
such as the use of anti-vectorial devices, the acquired
immunity or access to antimalarial drugs (Rogers et
al., 2002).
Despite this non-linear relationship, some studies
aimed to define parasite prevalence levels from the
presence of breeding sites or vector densities, or to
define malaria cases from geo-climatic indicators. In
Thailand, in a study based on Ikonos data, no association was found between the presence of malaria in
houses and the distance to streams (Sithiprasasna et
al., 2005b), while in another study based on aerial and
satellite photographs in a Cambodian village
(Cambodia Reconnaissance Survey Digital Data,
Ministry of Public Works and Transportation,
Kingdom of Cambodia), increased distance to the forest was clearly protective (Incardona et al., 2007). In
The Gambia, children parasite prevalence was predicted in 65 villages using a set of explanatory variables,
i.e. age, impregnated bednets and NDVI included as
proxy for the length of the transmission season. The
fitted model allowed a prediction of the effects of
changes in bednet use on transmission (Thomson et
al., 1999). The MARA/ARMA project materialised
out of the need for malaria risk maps on the scale of
the entire continent (Snow et al., 1996). More recently, the mapping malaria project (MAP) was born with
the objective of gathering worldwide parasite prevalence data and making them freely available on the
Internet (http://www.map.ox.ac.uk/) (Guerra et al.,
2007). A model of the spatial limits and endemicity
levels of P. falciparum and P. vivax was constructed
from available data linked with temperature and
humidity information (Guerra et al., 2008). In West
and Central Africa, P. falciparum prevalence maps
have been completed based on MARA/ARMA field
data and a seasonality model based on the NDVI, temperature and rainfall (Gemperli et al., 2006a). In Mali,
a prevalence risk map was based on the distance to
water, mean NDVI during the rainy season, the lowest
temperature during the 3 months preceding the rainy
season, and the number of months with rainfall
exceeding 60 mm (Kleinschmidt et al., 2000). In
Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania, predictions of the parasite prevalence were based on temperature, rainfall,
humidity, NDVI, altitude and corroborated historical
maps (Omumbo et al., 2002). Later, these maps were

V. Machault et al. - Geospatial Health 5(2), 2011, pp. 151-168

further improved by adding human density, urbanization data, presence of water collections and ecological,
environmental data (Omumbo et al., 2005). In
Afghanistan, a 8-km resolution P. vivax prevalence
map was created using NDVI and LST (Brooker et al.,
2006).
Another application of risk maps is to evaluate the
risk of re-emergence of malaria in countries where it
has been eliminated. In a rice field region of Spain,
remotely sensed ecological and climatic features,
together with other malariometric variables, were
found to be associated with the possible risk of transmission (Sainz-Elipe et al., 2010) and a similar situation has been reported in Portugal (Capinha et al.,
2009). In the south of France, An. hyrcanus larval and
adult stages were mapped using remote sensing
imagery as part of a research project on the risk of
malaria re-emergence (Tran et al., 2008).
Mathematical epidemiological models overcome difficulties in the comparability of non-standardised and
non-overlapping surveys in the field of malaria mapping (Gemperli et al., 2006b). In those models,
remotely sensed data can be included as it has been
done in Mali where the NDVI was included in a temporal model of transmission to forecast the evolution
of a malaria epidemic (Gaudart et al., 2009).

159

bers by only 8.9% (Adimi et al., 2010). In Kenya, a
NDVI higher than 0.35-0.40 in a given month resulted in hospital admissions due to severe malaria in the
following month that surpassed 5% of the total annual number of admissions (Hay et al., 1998). In
Burundi, a model including NDVI, ground temperature, amount of rainfall and number of malaria cases
in a given month accurately predicted the malaria incidence for the following month (Gomez-Elipe et al.,
2007). An EWS in Eritrea, based on rainfall forecasts,
could predict the monthly clinical malaria incidence with a lead time of 2-3 months (Ceccato et al.,
2007). On the scale of the African continent, an EWS,
relying on the association between epidemics and
decade-level rainfall anomalies for malaria epidemics
has been developed and is available on the Internet
(http://iridl.ldeo.columbia.edu/maproom/.Health/.Reg
ional/.Africa/.Malaria/.MEWS/) (Grover-Kopec et al.,
2005). Thus, weather should be considered in the
development of malaria EWS (Teklehaimanot et al.,
2004). Nevertheless, morbidity and mortality models
should be interpreted with care because of the difficulty of modeling the acquired immunity among human
population, which moderates the link between environment and malaria transmission.
Detection of changes

Morbidity and mortality
Environmental and climatic indicators have been
used in models explaining malaria morbidity and mortality or in models attempting to predict outbreaks.
For example, remotely sensed temperature and vegetation indexes, were shown to be correlated with the
number of malaria cases admitted to hospitals in
Bangladesh by calculating NDVI and surface temperature as deviations from their minimum and maximum
values to take into account meteorological fluctuations rather than long-term climatic variables
(Rahman et al., 2006). A French military mission to
sub-Saharan Africa, representing a short-term exposure for non-immune individuals, showed that a NDVI
higher than 0.35 was a major risk factor for clinical
malaria and the relative weight of this indicator surpassed that of age and chemoprophylaxis compliance
(Machault et al., 2008). In Afghanistan, an autoregressive model accounting for malariometric indices
(i.e. infection during 1 month depending on the infections during the previous month), showed that NDVI
and LST are capable of predicting the average total
number of cases for the following 6 months. As it
turned out, the prediction exceeded the actual num-

Image processing allows the detection of environmental changes over time that can be associated with
a new, increased or decreased malaria risk. Such an
association between ecological changes and the presence of An. arabiensis larval habitats has been shown
in a Kenyan village (Jacob et al., 2007). Indeed, the
proportion of water collections was higher in areas
that had undergone environmental changes between
1988 and 2005, especially in lands that became fallow.
In urban settings, land cover changes have also been
associated with breeding sites. In two Kenyan cities,
multi-spectral thermal imager (MTI; http://www.globalsecurity.org/space/systems/mti.htm) images recorded
at 14-years interval showed that presence, abundance
and spatial distribution of larval habitats were related
to urbanization (Jacob et al., 2003). An. arabiensis
aggressiveness, explored over a decade-long time scale
in Dakar, and built-up areas predicted and mapped
using the classification of two SPOT images of 2.5 m
and 20 m resolution, highlighted the benefits of urbanization as the proportion of the population at higher
risk for malaria transmission greatly decreased
(Machault et al., 2010). In Paraguay, mapping of land
cover changes, particularly from forest to non-forest

160

V. Machault et al. - Geospatial Health 5(2), 2011, pp. 151-168

areas, were evaluated using time series of the NDVI
derived from the Global Inventory Modeling and
Mapping Studies (GIMMS) (http://gcmd.nasa.gov/
records/GCMD_GLCF_GIMMS.html) and showed an
association with malaria case rates (Wayant et al.,
2010).
Urban malaria mapping
Urbanization, currently increasing so fast that near
60% of the world’s population will live in cities by
2030 (Nations, 2003), has a considerable impact on
the composition of the vector system and malaria
transmission dynamics (Antonio-Nkondjio et al.,
2005). Many studies have reported the existence of
malaria transmission in urban areas, even if levels are
usually lower than those in peri-urban and rural
places (Robert et al., 2003; Keiser et al., 2004). The
epidemiology of malaria in cities is specific, and
urban malaria is considered an emerging health problem of major importance in Africa (Donnelly et al.,
2005). The urban disease burden, as well as its spatiotemporal distribution, is closely related to the
degree and type of urbanization, the density of the
human population, vector control measures, access to
health care (Robert et al., 2003; Wang et al., 2005a)
and adaptation of the vector to new or polluted
breeding sites (Chinery, 1984; Sattler et al., 2005;
Awolola et al., 2007; Omlin et al., 2007). Blood meal
sources are abundant in cities so the dispersion of the
vectors is low resulting in urban transmission dynamics being primarily driven by proximity of breeding
sites (Trape et al., 1992; Staedke et al., 2003). The
malaria risk is heterogeneous over small distances,
and transmission can vary among different districts of
the same city, as shown in Brazzaville (Trape and
Zoulani, 1987) and Dakar (Machault et al., 2009).
The consequence of this situation is that effective control can be expected from environmental management, including vegetation clearance, modification of
river boundaries, draining swamps and insecticide
treatment of open water bodies.
Urban breeding sites are usually small and difficult
to locate but direct identification of breeding sites in
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, using aerial photos facilitated larval control (Castro et al., 2004). Other work has
not been as successful, e.g. in Malindi and Kisumu,
Kenya, photo-interpretation based on 5 m and 20 m
resolution images from MTI, even when undertaken
by an experienced operator, could only detect 6% of
the breeding habitats (Jacob et al., 2005). The growing availability of higher resolution images will likely

improve outcomes. On the other hand, environmental
proxies can also be of interest for malaria mapping in
urban settings as shown by a re-sampling of the NDVI
at 270 x 270 m in the same Kenyan cities, that could
be correlated with a low density of dwellings and a
high presence of Anopheles breeding sites (Eisele et al.,
2003). In Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, a high prevalence of malaria antibodies and a high prevalence of
infection among children were associated with urban
environmental data indicating unplanned and sparsely
built-up areas (Baragatti et al., 2009).
The importance of urban agricultural activity on
malaria has been reported in several African countries
where irrigation has led to the emergence of larval
habitats (Afrane et al., 2004; Matthys et al., 2006a)
and higher malaria prevalence (Klinkenberg et al.,
2005; Wang et al., 2005b). Irrigated vegetable fields
near a French military camp in Abidjan have been suggested as the source of the unexpected high number of
adult Anopheles found there (Girod et al., 2006). In
Antananarivo, the capital city of Madagascar, the rice
field surface area, together with altitude, temperature,
rainfall and population density, were investigated as
potential risk factors for confirmed malaria cases
(Rakotomanana et al., 2010). In other cities, such as
Malindi in Kenya, no relationship was found between
household-level urban agriculture practices and the
distribution of water bodies (Keating et al., 2004).
Indeed, market gardens likely provide resting sites to
Anopheles rather than increase the number of breeding sites, as was previously demonstrated in Ghana
(Klinkenberg et al., 2008). Mapping of urban agricultural areas is one of the key elements in malaria risk
mapping in cities.
Malaria mapping and risk
Risk, hazard and vulnerability
RS has been exploited to generate population grids,
a key tool for providing information on populations at
risk for the disease. Indeed, malaria occurs only where
and when an infected competent vector meets a
human sensitive population. A recent review has
focused on the use of global population distribution
data for estimating malaria morbidity and mortality
(Balk et al., 2006).
Clear identification, characterisation and classification of urban ecotypes is sometimes weak, impeding
the evaluation of actual malaria burden (Siri et al.,
2008) but work is being done to map and model
human urban populations using RS (Tatem and Hay,

V. Machault et al. - Geospatial Health 5(2), 2011, pp. 151-168

2004). The definition of an urban area is not standardised and finding accurate global maps of urban
settings can be problematic. Radar, optical or the US
Air Force Defense Meteorological Satellite Program
(DMSP) night-light imagery has been exploited,
including complex geo-statistical analysis (Tatem and
Hay, 2004). Even if quantitative interpretations may
be open to criticism due to the diffusion of light into
neighbouring pixels (Hay, 2005), it has been used in
the Global Rural Urban Mapping Project (GRUMP), a
large population mapping initiative, which has been
shown to match up with descriptions of urban settings
all over the world (Tatem et al., 2008). On a national
scale (in Kenya), semi-automated mapping of urban
areas with images at middle spatial resolution have
been shown to provide satisfactory results (Tatem et
al., 2005). However, this type of global source could
fail to be linked to malariometric indicators, especially where population densities are low (Tatem et al.,
2008). On the local scale, an operational tool for rapid
urban mapping based on the joint use of radar and
optical sensors has shown to delineate urban zones
better than isolated radar or optical images (Corbane
et al., 2008). Unsupervised and supervised pixel-based
classifications of a Landsat 7 image have provided
accurate estimates of population density in census
areas of Besançon, France (Viel and Tran, 2009).
Finally, the detection of changes and quantification of
urbanization growth have also been undertaken using
radar and optical images in Douala, Cameroon
(Onana et al., 2005).
The risk areas should be defined as the areas where
hazard and vulnerability overlap. Hazard represents
the “potential risk”, e.g., the vector distribution, and
vulnerability relates to the distribution, sensitivity and
exposure of human populations. Some studies have
taken into account the superimposition of potential
risk and vulnerability to estimate risk. In Kenya,
RADARSAT-1 (25 m resolution) images allowed mapping of the areas favourable to the presence of anopheline vector breeding sites that also intersected with
human populated areas. Risk zones were defined as
the overlapping surface of those two areas (Kaya et al.,
2002). In Dakar, the non-populated areas, mapped
using SPOT images (2.5 m and 20 m resolution) were
masked when predicting malaria risk (Machault et al.,
2010). Indeed, as it is known that the peak of anopheline aggressiveness occurs in the middle of the night in
Dakar (Machault et al., 2009) and because evening
and night activities are expected to take place mainly
in or around dwellings, areas without infrastructure
were excluded from predictions. On a worldwide

161

scale, a recent study provided a map of the global spatial extent of P. vivax malaria, together with estimates
of the human population at risk of any level of transmission (Guerra et al., 2010).
Limitations
In the field of spatial modeling and risk mapping,
care must be taken to ensure the validity of the results.
In addition to the usual requirement to validate any
model and to take care in extrapolating the models,
which should not exceed their intrinsic possibilities,
specific issues need to be addressed with geospatial
modeling. The basic requirement is to attain the objective of collecting appropriate field data but it is
adamant that the mechanisms of the associations
between environmental data and each step of the
transmission cycle are fully understood. The choice of
satellite images must not only be driven by logistical
constraints. Images have to be specifically selected
depending on the scales of the biological phenomenon
under study. As reported in some studies, an analysis
of scale and spatial resolution needs to be undertaken
(Atkinson and Graham, 2006). Very high resolution
images could be considered as the best choice, but
depending on the topic, other types of images may
lead to identical or even better results (Hay, 2005). In
addition, images that are contemporary to the field
work undertaken are not always available. The consequences of any distortion between the times of collection of remotely sensed data and ground data must be
analysed and discussed. Remotely sensed environmental indicators can be proxies for ground conditions.
Nevertheless, their capability of approximating field
data must always be discussed, depending on the location, climate or topography. Finally, malaria interventions have to be known and taken into account as they
can confound the relationship between environment
and disease, as in the recent malaria indicator survey
data for Zambia or Angola (Gosoniu et al., 2010;
Riedel et al., 2010), where it was found that no relationship was observed between remotely sensed data
and malaria risk.
Conclusions
RS has become an all-important tool for evaluating
malaria burden, modeling malaria spatiotemporal distribution, and planning malaria control. The key issue
is to implement operational systems that facilitate realtime monitoring of human health. Risk maps could
become dynamic if the temporal association between

V. Machault et al. - Geospatial Health 5(2), 2011, pp. 151-168

162

the determinants of malaria transmission and the environmental and climatic factors is clearly understood
and if continuous remotely sensed data or meteorological forecasting is available. In this case, EWS can
be set up to anticipate epidemics. Of course, this
process can be completed only if the biology of the
vectors and the epidemiology of the disease in the
studied area are very well known.

Malar J 8, 13.
Barros AP, Joshi R, Putkonen J, Burbank DW, 2000. A study of
the 1999 monsoon rainfall in a mountainous region in central
Nepal using TRMM products and rain gauge observations.
Geophys Res Lett 27, 3683-3686.
Bayoh MN, Lindsay SW, 2003. Effect of temperature on the
development of the aquatic stages of Anopheles gambiae sensu
stricto (Diptera: Culicidae). Bull Entomol Res 93, 375-381.
Beck LR, Lobitz BM, Wood BL, 2000. Remote sensing and
human health: new sensors and new opportunities. Emerg

Acknowledgements

Infect Dis 6, 217-226.
V. Machault received financial support from the Direction

Beck LR, Rodriguez MH, Dister SW, Rodriguez AD,

d’Objectif

Rejmankova E, Ulloa A, Meza RA, Roberts DR, Paris JF,

n°07CO402) and the Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales

Spanner MA, Washino RK, Hacker C, Legters LJ, 1994.

(CNES). We thank Dr. Antonio Güell and Murielle Lafaye,

Remote sensing as a landscape epidemiologic tool to identify

director and head of tele-epidemiology applications, respective-

villages at high risk for malaria transmission. Am J Trop Med

ly, at the Applications and Valorisation Office at CNES, for sup-

Hyg 51, 271-280.

Générale

de

l’Armement

(DGA

-

Contrat

porting this work. We warmly acknowledge the reviewers for
their significant contributions in improving this paper.

Beck LR, Rodriguez MH, Dister SW, Rodriguez AD, Washino
RK, Roberts DR, Spanner MA, 1997. Assessment of a remote
sensing-based model for predicting malaria transmission risk

References

in villages of Chiapas, Mexico. Am J Trop Med Hyg 56, 99106.

Abeku TA, de Vlas SJ, Borsboom G, Teklehaimanot A, Kebede

Bergquist NR, 2001. Vector-borne parasitic diseases: new trends

A, Olana D, van Oortmarssen GJ, Habbema JD, 2002.

in data collection and risk assessment. Acta Trop 79, 13-20.

Forecasting malaria incidence from historical morbidity pat-

Beugnet F, Chalvet-Monfray K, Loukos H, 2009. FleaTickRisk:

terns in epidemic-prone areas of Ethiopia: a simple seasonal

a meteorological model developed to monitor and predict the

adjustment method performs best. Trop Med Int Health 7,

activity and density of three tick species and the cat flea in

851-857.

Europe. Geospat Health 4, 97-113.

Adimi F, Soebiyanto RP, Safi N, Kiang R, 2010. Towards malar-

Bogh C, Lindsay SW, Clarke SE, Dean A, Jawara M, Pinder M,

ia risk prediction in Afghanistan using remote sensing. Malar

Thomas CJ, 2007. High spatial resolution mapping of malar-

J 9, 125.

ia transmission risk in The Gambia, West Africa, using

Afrane YA, Klinkenberg E, Drechsel P, Owusu-Daaku K, Garms
R, Kruppa T, 2004. Does irrigated urban agriculture influence
the transmission of malaria in the city of Kumasi, Ghana?
Acta Trop 89, 125-134.

Landsat TM satellite imagery. Am J Trop Med Hyg 76, 875881.
Britch SC, Linthicum KJ, Anyamba A, Tucker CJ, Pak EW,
Maloney FA, Cobb K, Stanwix E, Humphries J, Spring A,

Antonio-Nkondjio C, Simard F, Awono-Ambene P, Ngassam P,

Pagac B, Miller M, 2008. Satellite vegetation index data as a

Toto JC, Tchuinkam T, Fontenille D, 2005. Malaria vectors

tool to forecast population dynamics of medically important

and urbanization in the equatorial forest region of south

mosquitoes at military installations in the continental United

Cameroon. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 99, 347-354.

States. Military Med 173, 677-683.

Atkinson PM, Graham AJ, 2006. Issues of scale and uncertain-

Brooker S, 2007. Spatial epidemiology of human schistosomia-

ty in the global remote sensing of disease. Adv Parasitol 62,

sis in Africa: risk models, transmission dynamics and control.

79-118.

Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 101, 1-8.

Awolola TS, Oduola AO, Obansa JB, Chukwurar NJ,

Brooker S, Leslie T, Kolaczinski K, Mohsen E, Mehboob N,

Unyimadu JP, 2007. Anopheles gambiae s.s. breeding in pol-

Saleheen S, Khudonazarov J, Freeman T, Clements A,

luted water bodies in urban Lagos, southwestern Nigeria. J

Rowland M, Kolaczinski J, 2006. Spatial epidemiology of

Vector Borne Dis 44, 241-244.

Plasmodium vivax, Afghanistan. Emerg Infect Dis 12, 1600-

Balk DL, Deichmann U, Yetman G, Pozzi F, Hay SI, Nelson A,
2006. Determining global population distribution: methods,
applications and data. Adv Parasitol 62, 119-156.

1602.
Capinha C, Gomes E, Reis E, Rocha J, Sousa CA, do Rosario
VE, Almeida AP, 2009. Present habitat suitability for

Baragatti M, Fournet F, Henry MC, Assi S, Ouedraogo H,

Anopheles atroparvus (Diptera, Culicidae) and its coincidence

Rogier C, Salem G, 2009. Social and environmental malaria

with former malaria areas in mainland Portugal. Geospat

risk factors in urban areas of Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.

Health 3, 177-187.

V. Machault et al. - Geospatial Health 5(2), 2011, pp. 151-168
Carter R, Mendis KN, Roberts D, 2000. Spatial targeting of
interventions against malaria. Bull World Health Organ 78,

163

John Wiley and Sons, New York, USA.
Cresswell MP, Morse AP, Thomson MC, Connor SJ, 1999.
Estimating surface air temperatures, from Meteosat land sur-

1401-1411.
Castro CM, Yamagata Y, Mtasiwa D, Tanner M, Utzinger J,
Keiser J, Singer BH, 2004. Integrated urban malaria control: a
case study in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. Am J Trop Med Hyg

face temperatures, using an empirical solar zenith angle model.
Int J Remote Sens 20, 1125-1132
Dambach P, Sie A, Lacaux JP, Vignolles C, Machault V,
Sauerborn R, 2009. Using high spatial resolution remote sens-

71, 103-117.
Ceccato P, Connor S, Jeanne I, Thomson M, 2005. Application
of geographical information systems and remote sensing technologies for assessing and monitoring malaria risk.

ing for risk mapping of malaria occurrence in the Nouna district, Burkina Faso. Glob Health Action 2.
De Meyer M, Robertson MP, Mansell MW, Ekesi S, Tsuruta K,
Mwaiko W, Vayssieres JF, Peterson AT, 2010. Ecological niche

Parassitologia 47, 81-96.
Ceccato P, Ghebremeskel T, Jaiteh M, Graves PM, Levy M,

and potential geographic distribution of the invasive fruit fly

Ghebreselassie S, Ogbamariam A, Barnston AG, Bell M, del

Bactrocera invadens (Diptera, Tephritidae). Bull Entomol Res

Corral J, Connor SJ, Fesseha I, Brantly EP, Thomson MC,

100, 35-48.

2007. Malaria stratification, climate, and epidemic early

Diggle P, Tawn J, 1998. Model-based geostatistics. Appl Stat 47,
299-350.

warning in Eritrea. Am J Trop Med Hyg 77, 61-68.
Chamaille L, Tran A, Meunier A, Bourdoiseau G, Ready P,

Diuk-Wasser MA, Dolo G, Bagayoko M, Sogoba N, Toure MB,

Dedet JP, 2010. Environmental risk mapping of canine leish-

Moghaddam M, Manoukis N, Rian S, Traore SF, Taylor CE,

maniasis in France. Parasit Vectors 3, 31.

2006. Patterns of irrigated rice growth and malaria vector

Charlwood JD, Alecrim WA, 1989. Capture-recapture studies
with the South American malaria vector Anopheles darlingi,

breeding in Mali using multi-temporal ERS-2 synthetic aperture radar. Int J Remote Sens 27, 535-548.
Donnelly MJ, McCall PJ, Lengeler C, Bates I, D’Alessandro U,

Root. Ann Trop Med Parasitol 83, 569-576.
Chinery WA, 1984. Effects of ecological changes on the malar-

Barnish G, Konradsen F, Klinkenberg E, Townson H, Trape JF,

ia vectors Anopheles funestus and the Anopheles gambiae

Hastings IM, Mutero C, 2005. Malaria and urbanization in

complex of mosquitoes in Accra, Ghana. J Trop Med Hyg 87,

sub-Saharan Africa. Malar J 4, 12.
Dugdale G, Hardy S, Milford JR, 1991. Daily catchment rain-

75-81.
Claborn DM, Masuoka PM, Klein TA, Hooper T, Lee A, Andre

fall estimated from Meteosat. Hydrol Proce 5, 261-270.

RG, 2002. A cost comparison of two malaria control methods

Eisele TP, Keating J, Swalm C, Mbogo CM, Githeko AK, Regens

in Kyunggi province, Republic of Korea, using remote sensing

JL, Githure JI, Andrews L, Beier JC, 2003. Linking field-based

and geographic information systems. Am J Trop Med Hyg 66,

ecological data with remotely sensed data using a geographic

680-685.

information system in two malaria endemic urban areas of

Cline BL, 1970. New eyes for epidemiologists: aeriel photography and other remote sensing techniques. Am J Epidemiol 92,

Kenya. Malar J 2, 44.
Ernst KC, Lindblade KA, Koech D, Sumba PO, Kuwuor DO,
John CC, Wilson ML, 2009. Environmental, socio-demo-

85-89.
Coetzee M, Craig M, le Sueur D, 2000. Distribution of African

graphic and behavioural determinants of malaria risk in the

malaria mosquitoes belonging to the Anopheles gambiae com-

western Kenyan highlands: a case-control study. Trop Med Int
Health 14, 1258-1265.

plex. Parasitol Today 16, 74-77.
Colombi A, De Michele C, Pepe M, Rampini A, Rossi S, 2007.

Gao BC, 1996. NDWI - a normalized difference water index for

Estimation of daily mean air temperature from MODIS land

remote sensing of vegetation liquid water from space. Remote

surface

temperature

data

in

Alpine

areas.

EARSeL

Sens Env 58, 257-266.
Gaudart J, Toure O, Dessay N, Dicko AL, Ranque S, Forest L,

eProceedings 6, 38-46.
Connor S, Flasse S, Ferryman A, Thomson M, 1997. The con-

Demongeot J, Doumbo OK, 2009. Modelling malaria inci-

tribution of satellite derived information to malaria stratifica-

dence with environmental dependency in a locality of

tion,

monitoring

and

early

warning.

Bull

WHO,

WHO/MAL/97.1079, 33.
Corbane C, Faure F, Baghdadi N, Villeneuve N, Petit M, 2008.
Rapid urban mapping using SAR/optical imagery synergy.
Sensors 8, 7125-7143.

Sudanese savannah area, Mali. Malar J 8, 61.
Geary RC, 1954. The contiguity ratio and statistical mapping.
Incorp Statist 5, 115-145.
Gemperli A, Vounatsou P, 2004. Fitting generalized linear mixed
models for point referenced data. JMASM 2, 497-511.

Corcoran P, Winstanley A, Mooney P, 2010. Segmentation per-

Gemperli A, Sogoba N, Fondjo E, Mabaso M, Bagayoko M,

formance evaluation for object-based remotely sensed image

Briët OJT, Anderegg D, Liebe J, Smith T, Vounatsou P, 2006a.

analysis. Int J Remote Sens 31, 617-645.

Mapping malaria transmission in West and Central Africa.

Cressie NA, 1993. Statistics for spatial data. Revised edition.

Trop Med Int Health 11, 1032-1046.

164

V. Machault et al. - Geospatial Health 5(2), 2011, pp. 151-168

Gemperli A, Vounatsou P, Sogoba N, Smith T, 2006b. Malaria
mapping using transmission models: application to survey
data from Mali. Am J Epidemiol 163, 289-297.
Gill CA, 1923. The prediction of malaria epidemics. Ind J Med
Res 10, 1136-1143.

Health 7, 518-525.
Han WS, Burian SJ, Shepherd JM, 2010. Assessment of satellitebased rainfall estimates in urban areas in different geographic
and climatic regions. Nat Hazards (Online publication date,
15 August 2010).

Gillies MT, Coetzee M, 1987. A supplement to the anophelinae

Hand LM, Shepherd JM, 2009. An investigation of warm-sea-

of Africa south of the Sahara (Afrotropical region). The South

son spatial rainfall variability in Oklahoma city: possible link-

African Institut for Medical Research No. 55 Johannesburg,

ages to urbanization and prevailing wind. J Appl Meteorol

South Africa.

Climatol 48, 251-269.

Girod R, Orlandi-Pradines E, Rogier C, Pages F, 2006. Malaria

Haque U, Magalhaes RJ, Reid HL, Clements AC, Ahmed SM,

transmission and insecticide resistance of Anopheles gambiae

Islam A, Yamamoto T, Haque R, Glass GE, 2010. Spatial pre-

(Diptera: Culicidae) in the French military camp of Port-

diction of malaria prevalence in an endemic area of

Bouet, Abidjan (Côte d’Ivoire): implications for vector con-

Bangladesh. Malar J 9, 120.

trol. J Med Entomol 43, 1082-1087.
Gomez-Elipe A, Otero A, van Herp M, Aguirre-Jaime A, 2007.

Hay SI, 2005. Remote sensing of malaria in urban areas: two
scales, two problems. Am J Trop Med Hyg 72, 655-657.

Forecasting malaria incidence based on monthly case reports

Hay SI, Lennon JJ, 1999. Deriving meteorological variables

and environmental factors in Karuzi, 1997-2003. Malar J 6,

across Africa for the study and control of vector-borne disease:

129.

a comparison of remote sensing and spatial interpolation of

Gosoniu L, Veta AM, Vounatsou P, 2010. Bayesian geostatistical modeling of malaria indicator survey data in Angola. PLoS
one 5, e9322.
Gosoniu L, Vounatsou P, Sogoba N, Smith T, 2006. Bayesian
modelling of geostatistical malaria risk data. Geospat Health
1, 127-139.
Green RM, Hay SI, 2002. The potential of pathfinder AVHRR

climate. Trop Med Int Health 4, 58-71.
Hay SI, Rogers DJ, Toomer JF, Snow RW, 2000. Annual
Plasmodium falciparum entomological inoculation rates (EIR)
across Africa: literature survey, Internet access and review.
Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 94, 113-127.
Hay SI, Snow RW, 2006. The Malaria Atlas Project: developing
global maps of malaria risk. PLoS Med 3, e473.

data for providing surrogate climatic variables across Africa

Hay SI, Snow RW, Rogers DJ, 1998. Predicting malaria seasons

and Europe for epidemiological applications. Rem Sens

in Kenya using mutitemporal meteorological satellite sensor

Environ 79, 166-175.

data. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 92, 12-20.

Grover-Kopec E, Kawano M, Klaver RW, Blumenthal B,

Hay SI, Tatem AJ, Graham AJ, Goetz SJ, Rogers DJ, 2006.

Ceccato P, Connor SJ, 2005. An online operational rainfall-

Global environmental data for mapping infectious disease dis-

monitoring resource for epidemic malaria early warning systems in Africa. Malar J 4, 6.

tribution. Adv Parasitol 62, 37-77.
Hayes RO, Maxwell EL, Mitchell CJ, Woodzick TL, 1985.

Gu W, Novak RJ, 2005. Habitat-based modeling of impacts of

Detection, identification, and classification of mosquito larval

mosquito larval interventions on entomological inoculation

habitats using remote sensing scanners in earth-orbiting satel-

rates, incidence, and prevalence of malaria. Am J Trop Med
Hyg 73, 546-552.
Guerra CA, Gikandi PW, Tatem AJ, Noor AM, Smith DL, Hay
SI, Snow RW, 2008. The limits and intensity of Plasmodium
falciparum transmission: implications for malaria control and
elimination worldwide. PLoS Med 5, e38.
Guerra CA, Hay SI, Lucioparedes LS, Gikandi PW, Tatem AJ,
Noor AM, Snow RW, 2007. Assembling a global database of
malaria parasite prevalence for the Malaria Atlas Project.
Malar J 6, 17.
Guerra CA, Howes RE, Patil AP, Gething PW, Van Boeckel TP,

lites. Bull World Health Organ 63, 361-374.
Hirzel AH, Hausser J, Chessel D, Perrin N, 2002. Ecologicalniche factor analysis: how to compute habitat-suitability maps
without absence data? Ecology 83, 2027-2036.
Incardona S, Vong S, Chiv L, Lim P, Nhem S, Sem R, Khim N,
Doung S, Mercereau-Puijalon O, Fandeur T, 2007. Large-scale
malaria survey in Cambodia: novel insights on species distribution and risk factors. Malar J 6, 37.
Islam MN, Uyeda H, 2007. Use of TRMM in determining the
climatic characteristics of rainfall over Bangladesh. Rem Sens
Environ 108, 264-276.

Temperley WH, Kabaria CW, Tatem AJ, H. Manh B, F.

Jacob BG, Muturi E, Halbig P, Mwangangi J, Wanjogu RK,

Elyazar IR, Baird JK, Snow RW, I. HS, 2010. The internation-

Mpanga E, Funes J, Shililu J, Githure J, Regens JL, Novak RJ,

al limits and population at risk of Plasmodium vivax trans-

2007. Environmental abundance of Anopheles (Diptera:

mission in 2009. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 4, e774.

Culicidae) larval habitats on land cover change sites in Karima

Guthmann JP, Llanos-Cuentas A, Palacios A, Hall AJ, 2002.
Environmental factors as determinants of malaria risk. A
descriptive study on the northern coast of Peru. Trop Med Int

village, Mwea rice scheme, Kenya. Am J Trop Med Hyg 76,
73-80.
Jacob BG, Regens JL, Mbogo CM, Githeko AK, Keating J,

V. Machault et al. - Geospatial Health 5(2), 2011, pp. 151-168

165

Swalm CM, Gunter JT, Githure JI, Beier JC, 2003. Occurrence

Klinkenberg E, McCall P, Wilson MD, Amerasinghe FP,

and distribution of Anopheles (Diptera: Culicidae) larval habi-

Donnelly MJ, 2008. Impact of urban agriculture on malaria

tats on land cover change sites in urban Kisumu and urban
Malindi, Kenya. J Med Entomol 40, 777-784.

vectors in Accra, Ghana. Malar J 7, 151.
Lacaux J-P, Tourre Y-M, Vignolles C, Ndione J-A, Lafaye M,

Jacob BG, Regens JL, Mbogo CM, Githeko AK, Swalm CM,

2006. Classification of ponds from high-spatial resolution

Githure JI, Beier JC, 2005. Capabilities of multispectral ther-

remote sensing: application to Rift Valley fever epidemics in

mal data for identification of Anopheles gambiae mosquito
larval habitats in African urban environments. Int J Remote
Sens 26, 523-534.
Jolliffe IT, 1986. Principal Component Analysis. Springer, New
York, USA, 1986.
Justice CO, Dugdale G, Townshend JRG, Narracott AS, Kumar
M, 1991. Synergism between NOAA-AVHRR and Meteosat
data for studying vegetation development in semi-arid West
Africa. Int J Remote Sens 12, 1349-1368.
Kaya S, Pultz TJ, Mbogo CM, Beier JC, Mushinzimana E, 2002.
The use of radar remote sensing for identifying environmental

Senegal. Rem Sens Environ 106, 66-74.
Lawpoolsri S, Chavez IF, Yimsamran S, Puangsa-Art S,
Thanyavanich N, Maneeboonyang W, Chaimungkun W,
Singhasivanon P, Maguire JH, Hungerford LL, 2010. The
impact of human reservoir of malaria at a community-level on
individual malaria occurrence in a low malaria transmission
setting along the Thai-Myanmar border. Malar J 9, 143.
Li L, Bian L, Yan G, 2006. An integrated Bayesian modelling
approach for predicting mosquito larval habitats. In:
http://wwwucgisorg, Summer papers, 2006 (accessed on
December 2010).

factors associated with malaria risk in coastal Kenya.

Machault V, Gadiaga L, Vignolles C, Jarjaval F, Bouzid S,

International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium

Sokhna C, Lacaux JP, Trape JF, Rogier C, Pages F, 2009.

(IGARSS ‘02), 24-28 June 2002, Toronto, Canada.

Highly focused anopheline breeding sites and malaria trans-

Keating J, Macintyre K, Mbogo CM, Githure JI, Beier JC, 2004.

mission in Dakar. Malar J 8, 138.

Characterization of potential larval habitats for Anopheles

Machault V, Orlandi-Pradines E, Michel R, Pagès F, Texier G,

mosquitoes in relation to urban land use in Malindi, Kenya.

Pradines B, Fusaï T, Boutin J-P, Rogier C, 2008. Remote sens-

Int J Health Geogr 3, 9.

ing and malaria risk for military personnel in Africa. J Travel

Keiser J, Utzinger J, Castro CM, Smith TA, Tanner M, Singer
BH, 2004. Urbanization in sub-Saharan Africa and implica-

Med 15, 190-194.
Machault V, Vignolles C, Pages F, Gadiaga L, Gaye A, Sokhna

tion for malaria control. Am J Trop Med Hyg 71, 118-127.

C, Trape JF, Lacaux JP, Rogier C, 2010. Spatial heterogeneity

Kiang R, Adimi F, Soika V, Nigro J, Singhasivanon P,

and temporal evolution of malaria transmission risk in Dakar,

Sirichaisinthop J, Leemingsawat S, Apiwathnasorn C,

Senegal, according to remotely sensed environmental data.

Looareesuwan S, 2006. Meteorological, environmental remote

Malar J 9, 252.

sensing and neural network analysis of the epidemiology of

Manga L, Fondjo E, Carnevale P, Robert V, 1993. Importance

malaria transmission in Thailand. Geospat Health 1, 71-84.

of low dispersion of Anopheles gambia (Diptera: Culicidae) on

Killeen GF, Knols BG, Gu W, 2003. Taking malaria transmission

malaria transmission in hilly towns in South Cameroon. J Med

out of the bottle: implications of mosquito dispersal for vectorcontrol interventions. Lancet Infect Dis 3, 297-303.
Kitron U, 2000. Risk maps: transmission and burden of vectorborne diseases. Parasitol Today 16, 324-325.
Kitron U, Otieno L, Hungerford L, Odulaja A, Brigham W,
Okello O, Joselyn M, Mohamed-Ahmed M, Cooke E, 1996.

Entomol 30, 936-938.
MARA/ARMA, 1998. Towards an atlas of malaria risk in
Africa. First technical report of the MARA/ARMA (Mapping
Malaria

Risk

in

Africa)

collaboration,

Report,

MARA/ARMA, 771, Umbilo Road, Congella, Durban, South
Africa.

Spatial analysis of the distribution of tsetse flies in the Lambwe

Masuoka PM, Claborn DM, Andre RG, Nigro J, Gordon SW,

valley, Kenya, using Landsat TM satellite imagery and GIS. J

Klein TA, Kim H-C, 2003. Use of IKONOS and Landsat for

Anim Ecol 65, 371-380.

malaria control in the Republic of Korea. Rem Sens Environ

Kleinschmidt I, Bagayoko M, Clarke GPY, Craig M, Le Sueur D,
2000. A spatial statistical approach to malaria mapping. Int J
Epidemiol 29, 355-361.

88, 187-194.
Matthys B, N’Goran EK, Kone M, Koudou BG, Vounatsou P,
Cissé G, Tschannen AB, Tanner M, Utzinger J, 2006a. Urban

Kleinschmidt I, Sharp BL, Clarke GP, Curtis B, Fraser C, 2001.

agricultural land use and characterization of mosquito larval

Use of generalized linear mixed models in the spatial analysis

habitats in a medium-sized town of Côte d’Ivoire. J Vector

of small-area malaria incidence rates in Kwazulu Natal, South
Africa. Am J Epidemiol 153, 1213-1221.

Ecol 31, 319-333.
Matthys B, Vounatsou P, Raso G, Tschannen AB, Becket EG,

Klinkenberg E, McCall PJ, Hastings IM, Wilson MD,

Gosoniu L, Cissé G, Tanner M, N’Goran EK, Utzinger J,

Amerasinghe FP, Donnelly MJ, 2005. Malaria and irrigated

2006b. Urban farming and malaria risk factors in a medium-

crops, Accra, Ghana. Emerg Infect Dis 11, 1290-1293.

sized town in Côte d’Ivoire. Am J Trop Med Hyg 75, 1223-

166

V. Machault et al. - Geospatial Health 5(2), 2011, pp. 151-168

1231.

Duchemin JB, Ratovonjato J, Ariey F, Rudant JP, Jeanne I,

McFeeters SK, 1996. The use of the normalised difference water

2007. Determining areas that require indoor insecticide spray-

index (NDWI) in the delineation of open water features. Int J

ing using multi criteria evaluation, a decision-support tool for

Remote Sens 17, 1425–1432.

malaria vector control programmes in the central highlands of

Moran PA, 1950. Notes on continuous stochastic phenomena.
Biometrika 37, 17-23.

Madagascar. Int J Health Geogr 6, 2.
Rakotomanana

F,

Ratovonjato

J,

Randremanana

RV,

Mouchet J, Carnevale P, Coosemans M, Julvez J, Manguin S,

Randrianasolo L, Raherinjafy R, Rudant JP, Richard V, 2010.

Richard-Lenoble D, Sircoulon J, 2004. Biodiversity of malaria

Geographical and environmental approaches to urban malar-

in the world, John Libbey Eurotext, 428 p.

ia in Antananarivo (Madagascar). BMC Infect Dis 10, 173.

Mushinzimana E, Munga S, Minakawa N, Li L, Feng C-C,

Randolph SE, Rogers DJ, 2000. Donnees satellites et maladies

Biang L, Kitron U, Schmidt C, Beck L, Zhou G, Githeko AK,

transmises par vecteurs la creation de cartes de prediction du

Yan G, 2006. Landscape determinants and remote sensing of
anopheline mosquito larval habitats in the western Kenya
highlands. Malar J 5, 13.
Mutuku FM, Bayoh MN, Hightower AW, Vulule JM, Gimnig
JE, Mueke JM, Amimo FA, Walker ED, 2009. A supervised

risque. Bull Soc Pathol Exot 93, 207.
Raso G, Silué KD, Vounatsou P, Singer BH, Yapi A, Tanner M,
Utzinger J, N’Goran EK, 2009. Spatial risk profiling of
Plasmodium falciparum parasitaemia in a high endemicity
area in Côte d’Ivoire. Malar J 8, 252.

land cover classification of a western Kenya lowland endemic

Rejmankova E, Pope KO, Roberts DR, Lege MG, Andre R,

for human malaria: associations of land cover with larval

Greico J, Alonzo Y, 1998. Characterization and detection of

Anopheles habitats. Int J Health Geogr 8, 19.

Anopheles

Noor AM, Alegana VA, Gething PW, Tatem AJ, Snow RW,
2008. Using remotely sensed night-time light as a proxy for
poverty in Africa. Popul Health Metr 6, 5.

vestitipennis

and

Anopheles

punctimacula

(Diptera: Culicidae) larval habitats in Belize with field survey
and SPOT satellite imagery. J Vector Ecol 23, 74-88.
Rejmankova E, Roberts DR, Pawley A, Manguin S, Polanco J,

Omlin FX, Carlson JC, Ogbunugafor CB, Hassanali A, 2007.

1995. Predictions of adult Anopheles albimanus densities in

Anopheles gambiae exploits the treehole ecosystem in western

villages based on distances to remotely sensed larval habitats.

Kenya: a new urban malaria risk? Am J Trop Med Hyg 77,

Am J Trop Med Hyg 53, 482-488.

264-269.

Riedel N, Vounatsou P, Miller JM, Gosoniu L, Chizema-

Omumbo JA, Hay SI, Goetz SJ, Snow RW, Rogers DJ, 2002.

Kawesha E, Mukonka V, Steketee RW, 2010. Geographical

Updating historical maps of transmission intensity in East

patterns and predictors of malaria risk in Zambia: Bayesian

Africa usong remote sensing. Photogram Eng Remote Sens 68,

geostatistical modelling of the 2006 Zambia national malaria

161-166.

indicator survey (ZMIS). Malar J 9, 37.

Omumbo JA, Hay SI, Snow RW, 2005. Modelling malaria risk

Robert V, Le Goff G, Toto JC, Mulder L, Fondjo E, Manga L,

in East Africa at high-spatial resolution. Trop Med Int Health

Carnevale P, 1993. Anthropophilic mosquitoes and malaria

10, 557-566.

transmission at Edea, Cameroon. Trop Med Parasitol 44,

Onana VDP, Rudant J-P, Etouna J, Wade S, 2005. Dynamique

14-18.

urbaine à l’aide d’images RSO de ERS et HRV de SPOT, et son

Robert V, Macintyre K, Keating J, Trape JF, Duchemin JB, Beier

impact dans les facteurs d’aggravation des risques d’inonda-

JC, 2003. Malaria transmission in urban sub-saharan Africa.

tion en milieu urbain: cas de la ville de Douala (Cameroun).

Am J Trop Med Hyg 68, 169-176.

Teledetection 5, 19-32.

Roberts DR, Paris JF, Manguin S, Harbach RE, Woodruff R,

Patz JA, Daszak P, Tabor GM, Aguirre AA, Pearl M, Epstein J,

Rejmankova E, Polanco J, Wullschleger B, Legters LJ, 1996.

Wolfe ND, Kilpatrick AM, Foufopoulos J, Molyneux D,

Predictions of malaria vector distribution in Belize based on

Bradley DJ, 2004. Unhealthy landscapes: policy recommenda-

multispectral satellite data. Am J Trop Med Hyg 54, 304-308.

tions on land use change and infectious disease emergence.

Rogers DJ, 2006. Models for vectors and vector-borne diseases.

Environ Health Perspect 112, 1092-1098.

Adv Parasitol 62, 1-35.

Patz JA, Strzepek K, Lele S, Hedden M, Greene S, Noden B, Hay

Rogers DJ, Randolph SE, Snow RW, Hay SI, 2002. Satellite

SI, Kalkstein L, Beier JC, 1998. Predicting key malaria trans-

imagery in the study and forecast of malaria. Nature 415, 710-

mission factors, biting and entomological inoculation rates,
using modelled soil moisture in Kenya. Trop Med Int Health
3, 818-827.

715.
Rongnoparut P, Ugsang DM, Baimai V, Honda K, Sithiprasasna
R, 2005. Use of a remote sensing-based geographic informa-

Rahman A, Kogan F, Roytman L, 2006. Analysis of malaria

tion system in the characterizing spatial patterns for

cases in Bangladesh with remote sensing data. Am J Trop Med

Anopheles minimus A and C breeding habitats in western

Hyg 74, 17-19.

Thailand. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health 36,

Rakotomanana F, Randremanana RV, Rabarijaona LP,

1145-1152.

V. Machault et al. - Geospatial Health 5(2), 2011, pp. 151-168

167

Rouse JW, Hass RH, Schell JA, Deering DW, 1973. Monitoring

Sogoba N, Vounatsou P, Bagayoko MM, Doumbia S, Dolo G,

vegetation systems in the Great Plains with ERTS. Third ERTS

Gosoniu L, Traore SF, Tourre YT, Smith T, 2007. The spatial
distribution of Anopheles gambiae sensu stricto and An. ara-

Symposium, NASA SP 351, 309-317.
Sabatinelli G, Rossi P, Belli A, 1986. Dispersion of Anopheles
gambiae s.l. in an urban zone of Ouagadougou (Burkina

biensis (Diptera: Culicidae) in Mali. Geospat Health 1, 213222.
Staedke SG, Nottingham EW, Cox J, Kamya MR, Rosenthal PJ,

Faso). Parassitologia 28, 33-39.
Sainz-Elipe S, Latorre JM, Escosa R, Masia M, Fuentes MV,

Dorsey G, 2003. Short report: proximity to mosquito breeding

Mas-Coma S, Bargues MD, 2010. Malaria resurgence risk in

sites as a risk factor for clinical malaria episodes in an urban

southern Europe: climate assessment in an historically endem-

cohort of Ugandan children. Am J Trop Med Hyg 69, 244-246.

ic area of rice fields at the Mediterranean shore of Spain.

Steinmann P, Zhou XN, Matthys B, Li YL, Li HJ, Chen SR,
Yang Z, Fan W, Jia TW, Vounatsou P, Utzinger J, 2007. Spatial

Malar J 9, 221.
Sarma PK, Lahkar BP, Ghosh S, Rabha A, Das JP, Nath NK,
Dey S, Brahma N, 2008. Land use and land cover change and

risk profiling of Schistosoma japonicum in Eryuan county,
Yunnan province, China. Geospat Health 2, 59-73.

future implication analysis in Manas National Park, India

Stoops CA, Gionar YR, Shinta, Sismadi P, Rachmat A, Elyazar

using multi-temporal satellite data. Current Science 95,

IF, Sukowati S, 2008. Remotely-sensed land use patterns and

223-227.

the presence of Anopheles larvae (Diptera: Culicidae) in

Sattler MA, Mtasiwa D, Kiama M, Premji Z, Tanner M, Killeen
GF, Lengeler C, 2005. Habitat characterization and spatial distribution of Anopheles sp. mosquito larvae in Dar es Salaam

Sukabumi, West Java, Indonesia. J Vector Ecol 33, 30-39.
Sullivan D, 2010. Uncertainty in mapping malaria epidemiology: implications for control. Epidemiol Rev 32, 175-187.
Tatem AJ, Guerra CA, Kabaria CW, Noor AM, Hay SI, 2008.

(Tanzania) during an extended dry period. Malar J 4, 4.
Sharma RR, Samarkoon L, Hazarika M, Kafle TP, 2007.

Human population, urban settlement patterns and their

Applicability of tropical rainfall measuring mission to predict

impact on Plasmodium falciparum malaria endemicity. Malar
J 7, 218.

floods on the Bagmati River. J Hydrol Meteorol 4, 1-15.
Silué KD, Raso G, Yapi A, Vounatsou P, Tanner M, N’Goran

Tatem AJ, Hay SI, 2004. Measuring urbanization pattern and

EK, Utzinger J, 2008. Spatially-explicit risk profiling of

extent for malaria research: a review of remote sensing

Plasmodium falciparum infections at a small scale: a geosta-

approaches. J Urban Health 81, 363-376.
Tatem AJ, Noor AM, Hay SI, 2005. Assessing the accuracy of

tistical modelling approach. Malar J 7, 111.
Siri JG, Lindblade KA, Rosen DH, Onyango B, Vulule J,
Slutsker L, Wilson ML, 2008. Quantitative urban classification for malaria epidemiology in sub-Saharan Africa. Malar J

satellite derived global and national urban maps in Kenya.
Rem Sens Environ 96, 87-97.
Teklehaimanot HD, Schwartz J, Teklehaimanot A, Lipsitch M,
2004. Weather-based prediction of Plasmodium falciparum

7, 34.
Sithiprasasna R, Lee W-J, Ugsang D-M, Linthicum K-J, 2005a.

malaria in epidemic-prone regions of Ethiopia II. Weather-based

Identification and characterization of larval and adult anophe-

prediction systems perform comparably to early detection sys-

line mosquito habitats in the Republic of Korea: potential use

tems in identifying times for interventions. Malar J 3, 44.

of remotely sensed data to estimate mosquito distributions. Int

Thomas CJ, Lindsay SW, 2000. Local-scale variation in malaria
infection amongst rural Gambian children estimated by satel-

J Health Geogr 4, 17.
JW,

lite remote sensing. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 94, 159-163.

Shinghasivanon P, 2005b. Ikonos-derived malaria transmisi-

Thomson M, Connor S, 2000. Environmental information sys-

son risk in northwestern Thailand. Southeast Asian J Trop

tems for the control of arthropod vectors of disease. Med Vet

Sithiprasasna

R,

Ugsang

DM,

Honda

K,

Jones

Med Public Health 36, 14-22.
Snow RW, Gouws E, Omumbo J, Rapuoda B, Craig MH,
Tanser FC, le Sueur D, Ouma J, 1998. Models to predict the

Entomol 14, 227-244.
Thomson M, Connor S, Milligan P, Flasse S, 1997. Mapping
malaria risk in Africa. Parasitol Today 13, 313-318.

intensity of Plasmodium falciparum transmission: applications

Thomson MC, Connor SJ, D’Alessandro U, Rowlingson B,

to the burden of disease in Kenya. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg

Diggle P, Cresswell M, Greenwood B, 1999. Predicting malar-

92, 601-606.

ia infection in Gambian children from satellite data and bed

Snow RW, Marsh K, le Sueur D, 1996. The need for maps of
transmission intensity to guide malaria control in Africa.
Parasitol Today 12, 455-457.
Sogoba N, Vounatsou P, Bagayoko MM, Doumbia S, Dolo G,
Gosoniu L, Traore SF, Smith TA, Tourre YT, 2008. Spatial distribution of the chromosomal forms of Anopheles gambiae in
Mali. Malar J 7, 205.

net use surveys: the importance of spatial correlation in the
interpretation of results. Am J Trop Med Hyg 61, 2-8.
Thomson MC, Connor SJ, Milligan PJM, Flasse SP, 1996. The
ecology of malaria - as seen from Earth-observation satellites.
Ann Trop Med Parasitol 90, 243-264.
Tourre YT, Petrarca V, Traoré SF, Coulibaly A, Maïga HM,
Sankaré O, Sow M, Coluzzi M, 1994. Ecological genetic stud-

168

V. Machault et al. - Geospatial Health 5(2), 2011, pp. 151-168

ies in the chromosomal form Mopti of Anopheles gambiae
s.str. in Mali, West Africa. Genetica 94, 213-223.

Walter SD, 1994. A simple test for spatial pattern in regional
health data. Stat Med 13, 1037-1044.

Tran A, Poncon N, Toty C, Linard C, Guis H, Ferre JB, Lo Seen

Wang SJ, Lengeler C, Smith TA, Vounatsou P, Cisse G, Diallo

D, Roger F, de la Rocque S, Fontenille D, Baldet T, 2008.

DA, Akogbeto M, Mtasiwa D, Teklehaimanot A, Tanner M,

Using remote sensing to map larval and adult populations of

2005a. Rapid urban malaria appraisal (RUMA) in sub-

Anopheles hyrcanus (Diptera: Culicidae) a potential malaria
vector in southern France. Int J Health Geogr 7, 9.

Saharan Africa. Malar J 4, 40.
Wang SJ, Lengeler C, Smith TA, Vounatsou P, Diadie DA,

Trape JF, Lefebvre-Zante E, Legros F, Ndiaye G, Bouganali H,

Pritroipa X, Convelbo N, Kientga M, Tanner M, 2005b.

Druilhe P, Salem G, 1992. Vector density gradients and the

Rapid urban malaria appraisal (RUMA) I: epidemiology of

epidemiology of urban malaria in Dakar, Senegal. Am J Trop
Med Hyg 47, 181-189.

urban malaria in Ouagadougou. Malar J 4, 43.
Wangdi K, Singhasivanon P, Silawan T, Lawpoolsri S, White NJ,

Trape JF, Zoulani A, 1987. Malaria and urbanization in central

Kaewkungwal J, 2010. Development of temporal modelling

Africa: the example of Brazzaville. Part II: Results of entomo-

for forecasting and prediction of malaria infections using time-

logical surveys and epidemiological analysis. Trans R Soc Trop

series and ARIMAX analyses: a case study in endemic districts

Med Hyg 81 (Suppl 2), 10-18.

of Bhutan. Malar J 9, 251.

Tucker CJ, 1979. Red and photographic infrared linear combi-

Wayant NM, Maldonado D, Rojas de Arias A, Cousino B,

nations for monitoring vegetation. Remote Sens Environ 8,

Goodin DG, 2010. Correlation between normalized difference

127-150.

vegetation index and malaria in a subtropical rain forest

United Nations, 2003. Word urbanization prospects : the 2007
revision. Population Division of the Department of Economic
and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, New
York, USA.
Vancutsem C, Ceccato P, Dinku T, Connor SJ, 2010. Evaluation
of MODIS land surface temperature data to estimate air temperature in different ecosystems over Africa. Rem Sens
Environ 114, 449-465.

undergoing rapid anthropogenic alteration. Geospat Health 4,
179-190.
WHO, 1955. Eighth World Health Assembly (Mexico, D.F., 1027 May 1955). Official records of the World Health
Organization. N° 63. World Health Organization, Geneva,
Switzerland, 236-240.
WHO, 2010. World Malaria Report 2010. World Health
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.

Vanwambeke SO, Somboon P, Harbach RE, Isenstadt M,

Wold S, Ruhe A, Wold H, Dunn WJ, 1984. The collinearity

Lambin EF, Walton C, Butlin RK, 2007. Lanscape and land

problem in linear regression. The partial least squares (PLS)

cover factors influence the presence of Aedes and Anopheles

approach to generalized inverses. SIAM J Sci Stat Comput 5,

larvae. J Med Entomol 44, 133-144.

735-743.

Vanwambeke SO, van Benthem BH, Khantikul N, Burghoorn-

Wood BL, Washino RK, Beck L, Hibbard K, Pitcairn M,

Maas C, Panart K, Oskam L, Lambin EF, Somboon P, 2006.

Roberts D, Rejmankova E, Paris J, Hacker C, Salute J, Sebesta

Multi-level analyses of spatial and temporal determinants for

P, Legters L, 1991. Distinguishing high and low anopheline-

dengue infection. Int J Health Geogr 5, 5.

producing rice fields using remote sensing and GIS technolo-

Viel JF, Tran A, 2009. Estimating denominators: satellite-based
population estimates at a fine spatial resolution in a European
urban area. Epidemiology 20, 214-222.
Vignolles C, Lacaux JP, Tourre YM, Bigeard G, Ndione JA,

gies. Prev Vet Med 11, 277-288.
Xu H, 2006. Modification of normalised difference water index
(NDWI) to enhance open water features in remotely sensed
imagery. Int J Remote Sens 27, 3015-3033.

Lafaye M, 2009. Rift Valley fever in a zone potentially occu-

Zhang X, Feng X, Jiang H, 2010. Object-oriented method for

pied by Aedes vexans in Senegal: dynamics and risk mapping.

urban vegetation mapping using IKONOS imagery. Int J

Geospat Health 3, 211-220.

Remote Sens 31, 177-196.

